I love you.
I want to show you how to use the fabric.
I like the fabric of the fabric.
I like it.
I can see the fabric of the fabric.
I like the fabric of the fabric.
All right, we'll get started.
Welcome back.
Thanks for bearing with me last week while I was away on business.
as a reminder if you wanted to see your midterm
talk to me during office hours we're having normal office hours
tomorrow remotely
but if you're in the classroom today it wasn't too big of a sack
so I grabbed them all so if anybody wants to see it at the break let me know
we can have you take a look at Ben
the
I don't know
Midterm was a little bit, I think I was a little surprised at the results, so please let me know if I can help in any way.
I'm trying to plan to do some review over the next few weeks.
We're on week eight, so we have three more weeks and only two more weeks of new material that I'm going to cover,
so that means we'll have at least one whole class.
I might throw in some stuff about Java somewhere in here.
Java concurrency, which I've been wanting to talk about for my 447 classes.
So I might try to see if I can squeeze that in.
But if there's specific topics that you want to let me know about in Discord or email, let me know.
If you want me to try to cover.
I'm also going to go back and look at the midterm.
I didn't have time this week, but I'm going to go back and look at the midterm results.
I kind of posted like which categories of questions people struggle with.
So I'm going to try to make sure to cover some of that as well during the review sessions that we do.
Because, you know, I want you to succeed.
So please, you know, if you have specific questions, come to office hours, either before class here or on Zoom on Wednesday.
And I'm happy to work through anything there.
There was an announcement I sent out last night about the CS program assessment.
So CDM School of Computing likes to at this time in the spring with the 447 classes evaluate the program.
So they're looking to see how effective the program is.
So the questions that are on the quiz that I published, they're not graded for the course,
except if you do the quiz, you get two points at the end added on to your final score.
I normally haven't been doing extra credit lately but I wanted to give you an incentive to do it.
It does help the school figure out how we might need to adjust the curriculum.
So please do that.
You'll get two free points on your final calculated grade.
Just remember that even if you're on the border and your final exam score is below 60%,
you're not going to get a C minus.
So that's per the syllabus.
I did edit the syllabus to just remove the line that says there's no extra credit, and I changed it to just add that little bit there.
I just changed that one paragraph, and that's just to keep the syllabus in agreement with what we're doing.
So I didn't know that I was going to be doing that until a couple weeks ago, and then they asked me,
and they said I didn't have to offer extra credit, but I do want to provide an incentive for you to do it, so please do it.
It does help my colleagues who figure out what the curriculum is going to look like.
So that's that. So that will be due on Friday, June 5th at 11 59 p.m.
So you have up until the end of last week of class to do that.
Really the weekend before some of you who are remotely be taking the exam before that,
but I just want, you know, those of you who are planning to take the exam like during finals week,
Monday, Tuesday, that you're focused on that for the weekend before and you're focused on studying for the fun week.
So try to have that done as soon as you can, worked at it.
Alright. Any questions on it?
I put it on D2L, I send it out e-mail.
Alright.
Do you have a question? No. Oh, I saw you moving.
Did anybody have any questions on the homework
that we just did for this week?
I haven't looked at it and I didn't set up my machine. So today's going to be the day somebody has a question.
It was a busy weekend because I was traveling after my business trip.
I had a wedding, so it was just crazy.
Anybody?
All right.
How about why don't we start with a quiz then that was due today
and then that'll be our warm-up.
All right.
Oh, there was one question too on the worksheet,
and I want to just share that.
So let me do that quickly.
Somebody pointed out to me that one of the solutions for the dangling pointer question
or the solution for the dangling pointer question was kind of a little incomplete.
So, if we look at this, the actual, this is the C program here that we're referring to here.
So the first one is OK because this is the worksheet from last time.
When we call foo, we get a new activation record on the call stack,
and we allocate space for that new integer.
And we then take whatever we got for N, we multiply by 2,
and we store that value in there.
And then we return a copy of the result.
So, we're actually updating that memory location that result refers to,
to contain that two times n value.
And then we're returning a copy, a bit-for-bit copy,
back out into the receiver of the call.
So actually that's not the right word.
The receiver, I forget that, I'm using that word incorrectly.
The receiver is who is actually called, so forget I said that.
So, the assignment that happens here, there's a new location, x, on the call stack for main that is going to get a copy of the result, right?
So, bit for bit copy.
The next thing down, though, we have this function foo, and this function is returning a pointer to an integer.
and it's returning the address of the result that we have computed here and stored on the call stack
in that stack frame. And that address, once this invocation of foo exits, that address is no longer valid.
It doesn't point to anywhere. So it doesn't matter if you call it here or and or call it here.
both of these end up being dangling pointers.
So the question that the student asked was,
well the solution just says that P is a dangling pointer.
What about Q?
And of course, Q is also a dangling pointer.
So if it's true for one, it's true for the other.
It's the same thing we're looking at.
It's the same reason.
Okay?
So I just wanted to point that out.
All right, so here's our quiz.
So, this quiz has to do with L values.
I just remembered I'm on call, and I don't want to be interrupted, and my boss knows that I'm going to go on air.
So, you don't need to be interrupted in the class for this.
They're very cool with that.
All right, so, here is the first question.
So, the question asks, is star P an L value in C?
And here's the context.
So, here's the coding app.
Do we think, I mean, you all took your quiz, and you all hopefully saw the answer,
But let's just review.
What is star p?
Is this an L value here?
Yes.
Okay, good.
The big clue is that it occurs on the left side of an equal sign, right?
So that means we're writing to that whatever p is pointing to.
p is a pointer to an n.
So it's pointing to some location in memory somewhere, and we're writing there.
So that's an L value.
So that was true.
The next one.
Star p plus 16.
I did not review these questions.
So let's hope I get them right.
Star p plus 16, is this an L value, let's see.
What do we think?
Sure.
All right, Matt, you wanna tell us why you think so?
We're just doing pointer arithmetic.
So if p is a pointer, you're adding 16 to it,
that points to a new memory location and then you're de-referencing that
location. Right, and then presumably if you had it so you don't actually have that expression
on the left side of an equal sign, but if you did, you could write to that memory location
that you just talked about. I had a student one quarter like, well, that doesn't occur
in there, so the question is bad. And I'm like, well... The ellipses are for it. That's right.
There you go, yeah, that's your out, right?
So it could occur there.
And so I think the way to think about this is this code here is giving you context, right?
It's giving you enough information that you can make a determination.
I think I ended up telling the student that we just would, I thought about changing this
word is to could be and then it satisfied the student.
So they were just very pedantic about language.
So next one, all right, so the expression &p is an L value in C,
and we have this same context here and my mouse is hovering over the ampersand L.
So is &p an L value in C in this code?
I'm seeing a head go like this.
I agree with that.
Anybody want to tell me why?
Does it make sense?
It's just a number value of the address, like it's just a-
a number. You can't write to a number.
Right, you're getting the address of something, and you can't assign the address of something
to be something else because it just doesn't make any sense, so the answer here is going
to be false. This time we have the expression x, and this is Java, so this is slightly different.
What do we think about this one?
L value or no.
And surely you can just tell me what the quiz told you
but then when you submitted it,
let's talk about the y.
Is this an L value?
Is x and L value?
It is an L value because we are taking it as a parameter.
So, did you say it is or it's not?
It is, it is.
It is, okay.
So I agree with that.
What's happening here is when you call f, and of course,
we don't actually have a call to f.
But when f is called, the only occurrence of x here
is in this f function.
And in order for us to execute this function,
we have to have some value in x, right?
And in order to get that value in there, we copy that in, right?
So x ends up being .
That's my contention.
And I think we're agreeing.
So I'm going to say true and then hope we're right.
I'm assuming somebody's checking, like,
and making sure that's what the quiz answer was.
OK, next one, x.next5, subscript 5,
is an L value in Java.
So x.next.
So here x is going to be a reference
to a C to an instance of a class C.
And so we can refer to dot next because it's not private or anything.
We can just say x dot next.
And that's an array, so we're just accessing the array at element 5
or I guess the sixth element because we're zero indexed.
But can we assign to that?
That's really the question.
Yes?
Yeah, so it's perfectly valid to say,
within the function f to say,
x.next subscript five with an equal sign after it,
and update that memory location, f.
Something else.
This one, how is this different?
Oh, x.five, sorry.
x.next subscript 5.next after that.
So is that an L value?
Could you assign to that?
Yeah.
I agree with that, right?
So x.next subscript 5, you're gonna point to a c,
and then a c has a next array.
So that's the whole other array.
You've accessed one array to get to the fifth,
to the element at index five,
that is gonna be of type C or it could be null,
but you could then assign to that things next array.
What happens when this Java program is executed?
So do we have here.
This is that example I had where we were simulating a reference,
simulating a reference, or callback reference, I guess.
So here, in our main program,
we instantiate a new int ref and we give it value two.
We instantiate a new c, and we pass that int ref into c.
So now c, R, is going to point to that.
And then we call f of C.
So here's our f, and then this is going to change r
to have a new int ref.
So I guess the question is, what happens
when this program executes?
So what do we think happens?
Do we crash because of a null reference error?
Let's first eliminate that, right?
So if we think about it,
so if we call the constructor,
we put 2 in there for n, okay?
And then we instantiate a C,
passing that instance of intref, okay?
And then we call f of C.
So we call f of C.
We're not leaving anything null.
We're saying c is r,
so now we're updating this intref here
to get a new value.
And so c dot r dot n should be valid, because we have a valid r here.
We instantiated this, so we had this thing.
I should actually maybe draw, I could draw it if it helps.
So like when main executes, we have an int ref and in our int ref we have an n, and it's
going to be equal to 2 and our main has this s pointing to it.
Okay, and actually maybe it's better if I give myself a little more space because I'm
So I'm going to have my main, this is my call sac.
I have S, and S is pointing to that thing on the heap.
And then I have a new C that I've allocated.
So I'm going to have a C.
And so we're going to call that C.
And C has an int ref R.
Right?
That's what we get when we first start out.
And now we're gonna call F of, we're gonna pass C to F.
So when we call F, we get a new stack frame, right?
And we have a C inside F.
So we have a C, C, and it's going to get that same inref.
So everybody's pointing to this thing.
And now the code executes.
So C.r is going to get a new inref.
So C, oh, you know what?
I drew that wrong, right?
my mistake. Let's fix that. C is not pointing to inref. C is pointing to a C. Otherwise,
it wouldn't compile. It has to point to the right type. Sorry. So now we're in there. C.r. So C.r
is now going to point to a new inref. So we're going to create a new inref.
It's going to get an n, it's an int.
And that's going to get the existing c.r.n times 3.
So I haven't changed the pointer yet, notice I'm instantiating this thing.
c.r.n is 2 times 3 is 6, so then this will get a value 6 in here.
And then the last thing is we have to update this pointer because we're doing that assignment.
at line 13.
And then we get back all the way out to main, so this goes away.
F exits and now we print out S.n times C.r.n.
So we should print out 12.
Does everybody see that?
So S.n is 2, C.r.n is 6, so 6 times 2 is 12.
So the answer should be plus any line.
Alright, does everybody see that?
That was too much to do in my head.
I ain't gonna dry that out.
I mean I could probably have done it in my head
if I weren't talking through every detail of it.
Next one.
So what is the result of evaluating
the following scholar code.
So our first thing, we have a line one.
We have a var y that's gonna get the value 10.
And the next line down, what is that on line two?
Is that a, the type of that Fs, I mean it says right there.
But what is that, how do we say that in English?
It's a list of what?
Fs is a vowel, it's a list of.
Functions that take an integer and return an integer.
Exactly.
So whenever you see this arrow, you're dealing with a function.
All right.
So our list of functions, we have one that takes x plus y plus one,
sorry, takes x and returns x plus y plus one.
The other one takes x and returns x plus y plus two.
And what's the y here, in this list of functions,
what y is it referring to?
Okay.
The line number one.
The one on line one, right?
It has to be, right?
So it isn't always going to return the same thing because you might change that var y to be some other thing.
It's a var, right? You can change it.
Okay.
So then we have this for comprehension.
So we have for each of these functions in the list of functions,
and for each y in this list of 0 and 1, we're going to yield f of y.
So now this time the y is gonna be different than that y, right?
Cuz it's a new occurrence of this variable that doesn't relate to the other one at all.
So our two values of y for this y are 0 and 1.
For each one, we're going to call the function that returns what those things are for you.
So actually, I don't believe this y is actually ever going to change in our code.
Does everybody agree with me, even though it's a far?
This y up here is never going to change, right?
Okay.
So, 0, 1.
And we're going to execute two functions.
So we should have how many elements in the end?
Four, right?
So that immediately, well, it doesn't, well, it eliminates this,
because we don't see any print lines, right?
There's no print line.
All right.
So what happens?
So we get zero and one.
So zero plus 10 plus one is 11,
and then 0 plus 10 plus 2 is 12,
so we should get 11 and 12 first.
Okay, so now we've got to just figure out
which one of these two it is.
So then for 1, we get 1 plus 10 plus 1
should give us 11 again.
Sorry, 1 plus 10 plus 1 is 12, sorry,
should give us 12 again.
And then 1 plus 10 plus 2 gives us 13, right?
So, it should be this one here.
I think what this one can do, is throw you a little bit, because this var y, you might
be tempted to think that y might change.
But this y here is bound to these, and the scope of this y is in this expression.
Here's a C program, and so we're asking what happens when the C program is executed.
So let's talk through it.
We start off in our main program with x getting the value 5, and then we're going to have
to that location on the call stack, that x location.
We're gonna take the address of x and we're gonna store it in p.
And then we're gonna call f of the address of p and
that will give us, since that is a pointer to an int,
you'll get a pointer to a pointer to an int.
That's why you have the double star here.
Always in c fun when you start seeing that.
I get this in Rust sometimes now too.
I'm working with Rust, so I'm starting to...
My eyes are popping out,
because I have to do these dereferencing things
in my head again.
Okay, so then we're saying,
okay, I'm gonna set q equal to null,
and what is the, okay, oh wow.
So we're gonna have our address of p set to null,
and then, is that gonna work?
Did anybody try it?
I don't remember what this one does.
It doesn't do anything?
It doesn't do anything.
Yeah, in the function f,
setting q equals to null has no bearing.
No effect.
There's no effect right?
It's not changing or accessing what q is actually pointing to.
It's just setting the local copy of q and all, and then returning.
Yeah, that's right.
It's the local copy of q.
That's right.
Right, right, right, good call.
Would help if I had to looked at this last night, but
I would have concluded the same thing.
Okay, so then down here, we're gonna change what P is pointing to,
to first we're gonna dereference P.
So we're gonna get 5 plus 1, we're gonna update P to contain 6.
And then we're gonna print that.
So we should get 6 printed.
So I think the answer is the second one.
I mean, technically it won't compile.
Will it not compile?
Because there's no quotations around the argument to printf.
Oh, look at that.
Same thing on the next one, if I remember.
Okay.
Good call on that, too.
That's not an answer.
So you have to pick the best answer.
So that's why, whenever you see, pick the best answer.
No one called me on that one yet, or maybe I changed the quiz.
Sometimes I reimport the quizzes and I don't always read everything.
It was missing in the one that I took.
But since it wasn't an answer choice, I figured it was an accident.
Right.
So did you actually try to put this into a file and compile it?
I probably wouldn't have.
I didn't, I mean to make this sound the wrong way, but I didn't need to.
I just, when I was reading through it, I just ...
Yeah, I feel like this is just because probably sorry to hear you know that and
you're just like, yeah, I see.
Okay, I like it, we'll go with that.
I'll probably make a note to fix the quiz.
Because we should add the quotes back and make it compile, at least.
All right, same thing here so
probably ignore this missing quotes right, as Matt.
This is, say again.
The third line is different from the previous one.
The third line?
In the, sorry, the 10th question.
I don't follow what you're saying.
You're saying the third line is different.
The 10th question, we are using the third line.
We are updating the pointer, if I believe.
So, it shouldn't be six, that's what I think, for the 10th question.
Well, let's talk through it, so.
Sorry.
We got five.
And then we're going to create a pointer p and get the address of x, and put that in
p.
We're going to pass the address of p in here.
And this, again, will have no effect, right?
No.
It'll cause a crash because it's actually setting what q is pointing to null, so it's
setting p to null.
Well, the difference is this here.
Here, in the previous question, Q is equal to null.
In this question, we're saying the thing that Q points to is null, so you're trying to
change this, and that's not valid.
And so it will crash because it's trying to, like, pack your call stack or something.
Well, no, it'll just crash, I think, from a null pointer.
Like, when in the line, in line 10, when you then try to dereference P and add one to it,
it will be set to null.
So it'll try and dereference a null pointer.
Makes sense.
Everybody follow that?
Yeah, so the difference here that you were trying to point out is this here.
So here, Q was just created on the call stack here.
Q is created on the call stack here, but it's a pointer to a pointer to an int.
And just like it was here, but here you're actually trying to, you're dereferencing Q
and setting it a null which will affect, will try to affect this.
And this was an address and you can't really change the address.
Which is what I thought it was that when you're dereversing Q,
you're essentially, you're getting P and so then you're setting P equal to null.
And so then when you exit the function and you try to reference the value
P is pointing to, P is now pointing to null.
Like it lets you do it, but then in line 10,
you're trying to dereference null to add one to it.
You can't do that.
Well, so this, so what this is doing here, so what this is doing here is
getting the address of not it's not, how do I explain?
So, this P is pointing P itself is pointing to someplace in memory,
and you're now getting the address of the pointer,
which is not what p is pointing to.
It's the separate location that's storing the pointer.
I think we're maybe saying the same thing.
And then that goes in as a pointer to a pointer to an int,
and then you're trying to dereference that and update it.
But that's...
Right, so if you're dereferencing q, that's p, right?
If q is pointing to p, which points to an n,
if you dereference q, you've got p.
Right.
I think I followed you.
And so then, instead of pointing p at some other valid integer value,
you're pointing it to null.
I'll type it in.
Let me see.
The only thing I have to do is add I think this.
This is why we hate C. It compiled.
Oh.
Ah.
Yeah, core dumps.
So you end up with an error.
It's a null pointer error, essentially.
It's trying to dereference what you've set to null, right?
Yeah.
That's what you were saying before.
Right.
Don't be afraid to type these in.
Yes, I agree with you, you're right.
Okay, last one.
So, what happens when this program is executed?
In our main program,
we have creating a struct S and
then this is going to exist on the call stack and
on the call stack, and then we're going to take that new struct that we've created,
and set its x equal to 1 and its y equal to 2.
And then its p equal to the address of this location here, where the x is being stored.
Then we're going to call f of s, and then we're going to, inside here,
we're gonna change s.p to be the address of s.y.
And then when this returns, we're going to call printf here.
We're gonna dereference s and print that out.
So what do we think is printed?
Think about it for a second.
I think the answer is one.
Does everybody agree?
Yeah.
Does anybody want to explain why?
I think I know why, but...
I ought to know I'm a teacher.
I would say it's because when you call F, it's making another local copy.
Bingo, so yes.
Everybody agree with that?
Mm-hmm.
It's actually copying the struct.
And we're used to Java land where in Java land or Scala land,
that would pass a reference to a thing.
And so we'd be operating on the same memory
inside this function.
But in C, that is not what happens.
You are actually copying a whole struct
into a separate copy of that struct.
And so when you change this here,
you're just changing that copy, you're not changing the original.
So we think it's going to be 1.
All right, let's find out how we did.
11 out of 11.
Okay, so we did it.
So yeah, the hardest part,
the hardest one that I had to explain,
the one that tripped me up the most was this one
because once you start seeing these,
your brain starts to go explode
because you have to dereference,
and you have to like,
you could almost like,
you probably could draw it out,
and then I might try that later,
just draw it out and see like,
if,
I've already convinced myself
by talking through it with you,
but I wanna see it like pictorial.
So, all right.
Awesome.
Alright, so we're going to spend, let's see, it's been about a little more than a half
hour.
So we'll spend.
Why don't we, I'm thinking the best thing to do is to start with the new material and
then we'll just reserve the end of class to just cover like review material.
It might be a little lighter, too, because some of the stuff we're gonna get into, the
subtyping gets a little heavy.
one of the topics in there is covariance and variance,
that stuff can sort of make your head explode a little bit.
So why don't we start with that, with the new stuff?
So we're going to start by talking about
inheritance and dynamic dispatch.
So context here, we're talking about code sharing
between classes, and we're asking questions.
What should happen when methods have the same name?
So we'll talk about classes and inheritance,
and we'll identify the difference
between static and dynamic dispatch.
This is actually one of my favorite arguments, too.
Okay, so in Scala, we have code like this.
We have an animal class, we have a bird class
that extends animal, we have another cat class
that extends animal.
they each have their own toString method.
And we have this array of animals
that contains one bird and one cat.
And then for each animal, we're going to call toString.
So what gets printed for each one?
Bird cat.
Yes, so the output ends up being over here, and then this is the Y.
So X is going to have a static type animal.
What does that mean?
It means that the time that the code is compiling, the compiler says, well, the type of X is
the type, I'm sorry, the type of X is the type that's contained in the array, statically.
So statically defined its animal.
Even though the compiler can see you did new bird and new cat, it doesn't pay any attention
to that.
So it has static type animal, dynamic type, or otherwise known as runtime type, is going
to be bird and cat.
And that's because you actually have a bird on the heap and then you have a cat on the
heap in another location.
And so the zero element is that concrete bird instance at runtime, the runtime type.
And the next element is that concrete cat instance at runtime.
So we call this when we're, what's happening is we're
dispatching to the toString method that
is defined by the dynamic type, by the runtime type.
So we call that dynamic dispatch, or late binding.
It's binding at runtime, it's not binding at runtime.
time. So then for Java, what gets printed for Java? What do we think? Same, yeah Java is going to do
the same thing. So same thing, bird and cat, static type animal dynamic type bird
cat, and then we have dynamic dispatch late binding. So we'll use the dynamic
type or the runtime type of the object. Okay plot thickens. C++, what do we think is
going to get printed here?
Anybody want to guess?
You think it's the same or different?
It might just be animal, animal.
Don't you have to mark functions as virtual for that to work in C++?
Yep, exactly, we'll get to the virtual thing in a second.
So Matt is correct, the result is gonna be animal.
Animal, x has static type animal, same idea here.
The dynamic type is the same idea, bird and cat, right?
But C uses, sorry, C++ uses static dispatch,
and that means we bind which method we're calling,
which, sorry, which function we're calling,
member function, I think, is the proper term for C++,
which code is actually executing is determined
at compile time and not at run time.
So we're gonna use the static type of the variable.
The compiler will do that.
So this is why we get animal, animal.
So then Matt informed us there's this thing called virtual.
I remember learning virtual a long, long, long time ago.
And I remember then learning Java after learning C++
and learning that all methods are virtual in Java.
And that was our way of saying that the behavior
that we got in Java, the dynamic dispatch that we were getting,
was happening.
And it was similar to, it was the exact same behavior we get with virtual methods in C++.
So in C++ here, we have the same idea here.
Bird and cat, we iterate through and we call the two strings.
And we should get this time bird and cat.
So x has static type animal and dynamic type of bird and cat.
So the dynamic type is still the same idea.
It's, that's the type that occurs at runtime, that's the type that exists at runtime.
So C++ dynamically dispatches virtual methods, and this is only going to happen when objects
are accessed with a pointer reference.
So just because it's virtual is not enough to give you dynamic dispatch in C++, you have
to be using that arrow there.
If you were using, instead of a pointer, you were using a x dot two string,
you would get a different solve.
And that's what we have on the next slide.
So here on the next slide, we have a bird and a cat dynamic types.
And static types are animal.
But because we're using the dot here, we end up.
Oh, I guess I am wrong. I said that wrong. I lied. Dynamic type is animal. So the compiler
is doing something like truncating object, meaning in memory it only knows about animal,
and so at runtime even though you have instantiated a bird and a cat, ah, right. So because this
is a bird, and because this is a cat, you're constructing those things, but they are being
referred to as animal types. And that's because we don't have a pointer here. My C++ is very
custom. So this is, yes, truncating the object. So C++, this is also called coercing to the
parent class. So at runtime, the runtime only sees the animalness of it, not the
birdness or the catness.
Which object are we accessing when invoking G and F in line 4?
So which object are we accessing?
So we have our x is in a, we constructed in a, and we call x dot f,
this is Scala, by the way.
Just you can tell from the syntax, right?
We call x dot f with a two, and what object are we accessing?
There's really only one choice.
It's this A, right?
There's just an A. The question is a little bit weird.
It's building to the next couple slides.
So if we look at this at runtime, we call X.F2.
We'll print out A.F with a 2.
And then since it's not 0, we'll call F of X minus 1.
So then we'll call F with 1.
Then we'll print A.F1.
And then we'll call it again.
we'll hit this one and we'll call f . And we'll print f and then x this
time will be zero so we'll call g. We'll call g and print a . So that's the
output. So it's just the object reference by x. Is there an explicit
name for that object? So out here we have a val x and we've instantiated
and x is referring to that a, but inside the code here,
we have a different x, it's not this x,
so is there a name for the instance
that we're executing within?
I'm sure you've seen it before.
This?
This, exactly.
So.
This.
So what are the static and dynamic types of this?
In this case, it's only A,
because we don't have any class hierarchy.
I know when I was looking at these slides,
I had to look ahead.
I was like, what, you'll see.
So if we look at that output at runtime,
notice it's referring to this here.
So A dot F of two,
It's going to print a.f of two, and then it's going to call f of one and
then print a.f of one.
And this is just showing you that this.f is commenting what it is.
Yeah, it's calling this.f, right?
And then a.f of zero, it will print that and
then we'll call g, and then this.g.
So it's just there's only one thing that can possibly be this here.
So the reference to this has static type of enclosing class and
here it's A, and the dynamic type of the actual object that exists on a heap at runtime.
Okay, now the plot thickens.
We have a class B, which is a subclass of A.
Okay, so.
If I have a new instance of a b and I then call f on it,
if I call x .
There's only one possible implementation of f, so there's nothing to worry about here.
A.f of 2 will get printed.
And then we will call this.f of x minus 1.
So print this one.
And then we'll call recursively again with 0.
And then we'll call...
Finally, when we're at 0, we'll call this.g.
And notice what gets printed is B.g, not A.g.
And so the difference is that
This is always going to refer to the dynamic runtime type.
It's not really a difference.
The prop, the situation here is that this will always refer to the dynamic type,
the runtime.
So X will have static type B and dynamic type B.
This at line four has static type A.
And dynamics type B.
So the compiler in order to resolve the call just needs to.
You know, it thinks about this as if it were a compiler.
But at runtime it dispatches to the other one.
That's defined in some place.
So now static and dynamic type of this.
So what are the dynamic,
static and dynamic types of x and this.
And I think it's referring to that x over there.
So what happens?
So the output at runtime is going to be calling x f of 1.
So we have a b, and we call f of 1.
So we should get b dot f of 1, that looks right to me.
And then we're going to call this dot f,
so we're going to recursively call.
And this is just going to infinite loop.
So we're going to see that?
We're never actually decrementing x when we call.
We're never getting up there in that other code.
So the reason why is because x has static type a, dynamic type b.
This at line 4, static a, dynamic b.
This at line 9 is static b, dynamic b.
So we're never getting into that.
Functions or the methods that are defined in A.
So how do I access a method in a super class?
So the answer is there's this super call.
So if we look at this one, what happens?
So our output at run time is going to be b dot f of one.
So we call the f that's defined on b, so b dot f of 1.
And then we call super dot f of x.
So if we call super, we're going to go to the super class and call 1 in here.
So then we'll print a dot f of 1.
And then we're not 0 yet, so we'll do this dot f of 0.
And this dynamically will dispatch over to here.
And so then we'll print b.f of zero, and then super.f of zero.
So we'll get a.f of zero output, and then x is zero, so we'll call this.g,
and it will dispatch to the runtime type, the implementation of g for the runtime type.
So we'll get b.g, and the whole thing will exit.
So x has static type A, that's over there.
And note the difference here, x has static type A, so it doesn't have static type B,
but that's immaterial because it will dispatch dynamically to whichever one exists at runtime,
whichever type it is at runtime.
So x.f selects b.f.
Super at line 8 explicitly requests the F of the super class.
So that's what the super keyword means.
This is actually the same thing as what we have in Java.
The super and this as well.
This at line 4 has static type A and dynamic type B.
So this.f selects B dot F.
So code modularity and reuse.
So for OOP, we have classes with inheritance and overriding.
So we're used to this from Java.
We have class A, we have class B extends A.
We can override the F that's defined here.
We can override the G that's defined here.
The keyword override could be used here, as long as the method signatures are the same.
In functional programming, we would use functions and pattern matching.
So here our f does this match, and it actually checks to see, well, do I have a b.
You can actually use this syntax here, I have whatever of type b.
That's what this means.
And so I've matched on that, and then it will print this,
and then call the base function down here.
base A of x.
So this is how you do.
So what you get for free, which you're
used to getting in Java and Scala when
you do this kind of thing in functional programming.
And you have to use pattern matching to do that,
to get the same a.
So should we let programmers specify how classes
can be instantiated?
Should we let programmers decide which methods can, must, or cannot be overwritten?
So, here, if I try to instantiate an a here,
because it's abstract, it's not allowed.
So the compiler will throw that, will throw that back at you and say no.
What about this abstract method?
So, if I try to, if I have an abstract class a and I have this abstract method,
the way to know that it's abstract.
I think you have the abstract keyword on a def,
but if you don't have an equal sign,
then you know it's abstract.
So there's no method body for g.
You try to instantiate a b.
I'm sorry, you try to define a class b that extends class a.
This is a concrete class, and you're not
providing any implementation for g.
So this won't work.
You must override g and b, or b has to be abstract.
you have to declare it as such.
And then over here we have in our abstract class A,
we have a final method f.
And in b, we're extending a, we're trying to override f.
So we have an abstract g, which we try to implement here.
But we try to override the f that's defined here.
This won't be allowed.
You're not allowed to override f because it's declared final.
So in software engineering, we have something
called a template method pattern.
I find it very interesting that I
work with people who have never heard of some
of these design patterns.
There's the old gang of four set of design patterns,
If you have ever taken any software engineering classes,
you may have covered some of these.
But with functional programming,
you generally don't need them anymore.
This is why some of my coworkers
who are more functional programmers
from their college time,
they have never heard of design patterns.
They're like, what's a design pattern?
And I'm like, oh my.
Fast forward 20, 30 years from when I got out of college.
I'm like, okay, they don't know design patterns.
And this was in the 90s.
We all had to learn these because there were job interview questions all the time.
So in this design pattern, this is called the template method.
Basically what it does is defines the skeleton of an algorithm,
but it has varying steps delegated to some classes.
So this is actually the UML for this.
I don't use this, all the different color codes and the diamonds and stuff.
But you look at this code, what's going on?
And it's easy to recognize for me, as the minute I see,
Even though it wouldn't have this name normally,
I could see code like this and go, oh, that's a template method.
So the template method executes step one and
some operation in between step one and step two and then it does step two.
And notice, it's got step one and step two are defined as part of this class.
But operation one is abstract, and so when you create a concrete class,
you have to actually provide the details on what the implementation of
operation is. So this is a template method and then parts of the algorithm are
delegated out to subclasses. So you put the common behavior in a base class and
that helps you avoid code duplication and then the structure of the algorithm
is implemented once and then the things that vary are put in subclasses. In
In functional programming, how do we do this?
We just use higher order functions.
So you can think about in functional programming,
you would have some function that's doing this.
And this operation one would be some function
that you passed in that had some type, right?
A function can have a type or has to have a type.
It has some indication of what the parameters of the function
are and then what the result of the function,
the type that the result of the function conforms to.
So you would pass in operation one.
It would basically return.
It would take nothing and return nothing.
So in this case, it's somewhat doesn't make sense.
You would probably have data involved, some data type.
All right, so here's our summary.
Inheritance is letting you link classes
statically at compile time.
And if you think about it, when you
define a class and then you extend a class you're basically saying that a
class B like that extends class A is related and this relationship is defined
at compile time it's defined statically and we have static and dynamic dispatch
so static dispatch is early binding at compile time so we saw that was c++ and
you would select the method that's called based on the type of the reference
So the type in the source code.
The dynamic, and actually the type of the reference
in the source code, not the type of the thing that's actually
instantiated, which you can read and see that,
but it's going to be the type that variable that ends up
holding it is.
Dynamic Dispatch is late binding at runtime,
and you select your method based on the type of the object.
So this design patterns often provide object-oriented
Solutions for Functional Paradigms.
This is what I was getting at,
was a lot of my coworkers who are more functional-minded
don't talk about design patterns anymore
because that was an object-oriented development
sort of concept.
And we didn't really have a lot of functional programming
in the wild and industry until 15, 10, 15 years ago.
A Gang of Four is this book actually.
I think, is this first thing.
I have this book on my shelf.
If I felt like carrying an extra heavy book,
I would have brought it down.
But this book here,
it was all the rage in the late 90s.
A gang of four of these four people who wrote the book.
There are versions of this in Java,
by different authors,
but you can do the same design patterns
And so you may have seen this.
And this was 1994, so I was actually still in college when it came out.
And they emphasized this idea of favoring object composition over class inheritance.
And what does that mean?
And well, if you have, really all that means is instead of doing something like.
If you have like.
Class A and class B, this is UML.
This is the most common UML I use.
So you're defining class B to be a subclass of class A,
that's what this means.
Using composition would mean that you have a class A
with a reference to a B. And you would have some other class B.
And this is using different features of the language,
whatever language you're using.
You're statically defining this relationship here.
This is a more dynamic relationship.
But what you lose is you don't get the this and the super.
I mean, you can have this, of course.
But you can't get the super.
You can't call this dot something
to get an implementation over here.
You can't extend things over here.
There was a, when I taught data structures one,
or data structures.
Did I do it in data structures one or two?
I think I did it in data structures one.
I added something with backtracking
from my undergraduate textbook, which used this sort of
approach, which was in the 90s.
This was very common for us to define code this way,
using the features of object-oriented programming
using inheritance.
I opened up my textbook.
It was my favorite assignment from my undergrad,
but I still remember.
And it was a backtracking assignment,
and they had this whole framework for backtracking.
I started reading the code, and I was starting to convert it.
Like I was writing it in Java,
And I was like, we wouldn't write this this way today.
Like in 2023, or whatever it was, when I did it in 2004.
We would do this.
We would do this composition idea.
We would have other classes and refer to things and call methods on the other classes rather
than try to bake it into a structure like this.
So I ended up creating an analogous structure using composition instead because I was much
more modern, and I've been through at this point 30 years of software engineering.
And we all move this way.
We used to ask composition versus inheritance on job interviews.
We would have been interviewing people.
So that was still like probably 20 years ago.
That was a big shift that was going on.
The Design Pattern Catalog, let's see...
I haven't actually seen it.
So this is, I guess, a catalog.
I have seen this once before.
you can look inside the catalog, you can see it's history of the patterns.
So these are the standard gang of four patterns. Some of them I know better than others.
Decorator, Composite, Singleton. Singleton is, we get that in Scala with an object,
right? We get that for free with an object. Factory method, Abstract Factory,
Adapter's one of my favorites I've used.
And then design principles.
Oh, okay.
So this is Bill Venners, who I met once.
He wrote Scolatest.
I met him in a conference, probably about 12 years ago.
Nice guy.
He interviewed Eric Gamma, who was one of the Gang of Four authors.
I can read that if you want.
Okay.
So, we have a couple more slides here.
Let's just kind of talk through some of these.
So, if I have an interface fn, that just means function, right?
And I have an apply method that takes an int and returns an int.
I can do lambda notation in Java.
So that's what this is here, right?
So I have my array of functions.
So I'm instantiating that array.
And then I have this j here, which is going to get i plus 1.
And then I'm going to define a function using a lambda.
This is a lambda that takes an x and returns x plus whatever is in j.
So that function will be defined that way.
So this is what we see in Scala.
we see the equal sign or they call it the thick arrow, I think.
And this is the skinny arrow, right?
Or fat arrow, they call it fat arrow and skinny arrow, something like that.
So Fs sub i has static type fn,
an anonymous dynamic type of x arrow, x plus j.
So this is an anonymous function.
Anonymous classes, so this is like going back in time in Java as we go this way.
What we're doing here is, we're saying the same thing.
We're saying I'm going to instantiate a new FN and
I can instantiate the interface as long as I provide the implementation as part of it, right?
So this is an anonymous class, they added this to Java 1.1 I think.
And this means the same thing.
So I have an apply method that takes an x and returns j plus x.
So this is the implementation function.
It means the same thing as this.
This is a nice little shortcut.
So FS sub i, a static type fn, and
the anonymous dynamic type of whatever this expression is, new fn.
And then we have explicit classes.
So Java 1.0 didn't allow even this,
this wasn't allowed yet.
This in Java 1.0 was how you had to do it.
You had to explicitly define whatever your classes were going to be that
implement that interface.
There was none of this.
You couldn't do this open brace here and define it right there.
So here we have two implementations.
we have two functions here, right?
So this one takes x plus one,
this one takes x plus two,
or returns x plus one, returns x plus two.
And then you have to assign them that way.
So next week, we're going to talk about nested classes.
I think I moved that to next week.
But what's kind of interesting here is that Java has actually created, I think, I can't
remember all the details here.
But there is now a bytecode instruction that does like, that makes this much more efficient
than having to instantiate all these classes like this.
Actually.
So we'll talk about this, Scala doesn't use that new thing that Java added.
Scala, new instruction.
Scala still actually does the same thing under the covers of generating code.
I should make this clear.
When this code, when the compiler encounters this code,
it actually generates code that looks like that.
And Scala uses that whole mechanism.
But Java itself doesn't need to anymore because there's a new bytecode instruction that it can use.
And for some reason, I actually looked this up the first time I taught the class.
But for some reason, they didn't use it in Scala.
They haven't used it yet.
I think they're trying to get to that because it's more efficient.
It's very low level and I don't think about that every day.
Oh, and then that last bit there.
So FS of i with static type Fn, because Fn is there, right?
Type of the variable is Fn.
Fn array.
And dynamic type f or g.
So at runtime, it's either a number of g.
OK.
Here's some examples in C++.
So we have A as a pointer to an animal, and it gets bird.
And then we print out A arrow to string.
And since it's virtual and we're using
a pointer, we should get bird.
And then we're going to change A to get a new cat to have a cat.
And then we're going to call A dot to string,
and this time we should get cat.
I was not going to tell this.
So, this is contrasting pointers and virtual, so behavior again.
This is calling a method with a reference type.
So here, we're taking a reference to an animal and here we're calling a dot two string.
I think we end up getting animal for poop.
But I can't remember, I'd have to put it in.
We don't have the results.
I'd have to type that in to figure it out.
I think I've done that before.
This one over here we have a bee as a bird and
then we try to call to string and
We should get bird and then we should get cat,
although static types, it's different here.
I almost feel like we should be putting that in the editor and compiling the code.
Try those out on your own while you're stuck.
I'm not going to spend the time on it now.
I will actually probably do it myself but make sure you understand why.
Each method is being called.
Exercise for the Learner.
All right, so here we have class A with three methods,
class B which is extending A and we're overriding two of those methods.
Here we have a static type A. So A is a static type A.
Dynamic type is A because we instantiate an A.
We call A dot F, so we should get print line F, A dot F.
Oh yeah, it's not gonna tell us the answer, so.
Here we have, okay.
So just to make it clear, static type A, dynamic type A,
static type A, dynamic type B, because we're instantiating B here,
as opposed to an A.
And here we have static type B and dynamic type D.
that's because we're storing it in a reference of type B, so that's the difference.
Yeah?
With the first one or possibly the first two,
shouldn't those have some sort of error because A does not have an I?
Right, like B has a definition for I but A doesn't.
Yup, that should, yes.
But I don't think that this is necessarily intended to actually execute these.
Like, you could try the instantiation and then this.
You can actually, for this one, let's do it because it's Scala and I can do it fast.
I think you're correct.
So if I do, I'm going to instantiate it, then I'm going to call.
Oh, I've got to define it, right?
Let's get that.
All right.
So then we're going to call it A.F and then that will complain.
You have to create the A first.
Thanks.
You have to call it.
Yeah.
A dot F calls F, G, and H, and it's calling, obviously, we're not in an instance of B,
right?
So we never would call those.
So it's just going to print out A dot F and then calling G, and it's going to print A dot
G, then we're calling H, A dot H.
And then if we call A dot G, we should see G and H, right?
That makes sense.
A dot H, we should just see H, and then A dot, that's a call I, should fail.
Yeah.
So it'll complain, because there's no I defined for A.
And then I think, if we change Val A equals new B,
So in this case, it will dynamically dispatch to b's f because b has an f.
But then we call this...
I'm sorry.
We call super, right?
Because we call super, we go up to the one that's in a.
So we see that's why we get a.f here.
And then it calls this.g, so it'll dispatch down to...
Oh, in this case, there is no overridden g, right?
so it should print a.g, and then it calls this.h, and h is overridden so we'll get b.h.
You can try this out. So this time, a.g, again, g is only defined here and not overridden.
And then it calls this.h, so it prints that one, and then a.h,
should just give us b.h, because it dispatches there.
And again, a.i this time.
So I think, Matt, your point was the first one would fail.
I thought you were talking about the second one.
First one I knew should, second one I was curious about.
Because it is an instance of b, but
at least in my experience with object-oriented type stuff,
if you have a variable typed as the parent type,
you're only allowed to access things
that the parent class has,
even if the runtime type technically has that method
or variable or whatever.
You have a good point.
I messed up one thing here.
So the middle one there,
I was copying and pasting and reading from here.
So let's double check this.
So before, your intuition's correct.
So before I instantiated it here and I was lazy
and I did not assign the type and it assigned the type.
The second time when I instantiated the B,
I was also lazy and I did not statically define the type
to be a B, or to be an A, sorry.
What the REPL did was it decided that I meant that I wanted A to be type B, and that is
not what we have on the slide, so let's try that again to get to Matt's point.
I just caught that as you were talking.
Why are you highlighting all that?
Nope.
That is not what I wanted.
I did not copy and paste it.
Let's try this again.
Yeah, that's what I want.
So now the static type of A is, lowercase a, is capital A.
So I can call a dot F.
And that's what we had before.
a dot G.
a dot H.
With this one.
Matt, you're right.
would not call it would not work and that's what threw me just now because I
was like as you were saying it I was like you're like you shouldn't work and
I'm like oh you're right it shouldn't work but it's because my eye caught this
yeah it's just like a thing that Scala like does under the hood that I just
didn't know about or something yeah no you have to be careful with this type
inference and that's what what got me burned there was I did not force the
type A to capital A.
And then, all right, so if I so the one that we did before,
when I didn't put the type in, was what the REPL assigned.
It assigned, I was using the letter lowercase a, but in this case it's b.
And you can call the i on there.
there.
So if I had to say b.f, b.g, b.h, b.i,
which means fine, because the static type is i.
And because the REPL has to actually compile your code
before it runs in memory.
If you put this in a file and try to compile it,
that previous code wouldn't compile, the one at the middle
for that bar, that would come back.
And this one wouldn't come back here.
So these are intended as like, instantiate this line
and then practice that.
Put it in your REPL and see what it does.
OK.
So that's inheritance.
And this is a long set of slides.
So I'm going to get started on this stuff.
And then we'll find a logical stopping point,
and then we'll take a break in about 10-ish minutes.
So now we're going to think about inheritance
and then talk about what happens when
we have container classes and where we're
working with inheritance.
How does inheritance affect container classes?
So we'll compare inheritance and type parameters.
That's it.
I thought there was more.
It's the only bullet point that we can make.
So monomorphic, does anybody know what that means?
It means one form.
Morphic means form, and mono means one.
Monomorphic, one form.
So in C, if we want to implement a linked list,
So this is similar to what we have in Java.
We have when we did data structures 1, we have linked lists,
we have nodes, we have pointers to the next node,
and when that pointer is null,
then we're at the end of the list.
Right?
So here we have some item that is going to be a pointer to the integer,
so our item is going to be our data type that we're dealing with is integers,
so we have a list of integers.
You want to get the last one, well we just have to walk through the list of nodes and
just go to the next node ring.
And then when we get to the last one, then we return the item of the last one.
And that's gonna return a pointer because that's a pointer .
So what are the benefits and downsides of this?
The thing that's the most annoying is that you have to,
so this node has a type integer that it's hanging onto.
And if you wanna do this with a different data type,
then you have to use a float.
That's an int, that's a float.
So you have to have a float node.
So this becomes annoying because you have to duplicate the code.
Now you could use a void star,
star, which is a C way of having a pointer to something.
And then you have to cast it everywhere.
So that's no good, either.
And there it is.
So you could use void star.
So if I wanted a generic linkless in C,
I would have to use this void star thing.
So the difference here is my item is no longer a pointer
to int.
It's a pointer to a void.
and then I have to cast that.
So I don't get any static protection against casts.
So here in my main program, I allocate an integer,
and I set the value that p points to.
So I have a pointer to that location on the heap,
and I set the value to 2 billion or something.
And then I allocate a new node, and I set my next pointer
to null and I set my item to point to this P here, and then I go get last, so I execute
the get last and I return the pointer, which is a pointer, to an integer and I store it
off as a pointer with double.
And now I've tried to access that and a double is going to have more bytes than a P and so
you have this unsafe access.
you're accessing memory that's not.
So a double is gonna have, did I say P?
A double is gonna have more bytes than an int,
that's what I meant to say.
And you're gonna then access more bytes
than you are allowed to, allowed.
You're allowed to do anything.
So you'll get some undefined behavior.
So in Java,
This was the way life was when Java first came out.
There were no generics in Java.
So if I wanted a generic list, I used subtype polymorphism.
Remember that object is a super type of every reference type in Java.
So if I want to get the last, I can just walk through the pointers like usual
and return my object reference.
Right? And my code, I have to be aware, and I have to cast.
So here I have an integer P with a value of 2 billion.
I have a node at excess.
I set the next pointer to null.
I set the item to this P, the same thing that P points to or
P refers to.
And then I call get last, and
I try to cast the item that I got back out into a double,
and at runtime I will get a class cast exception because a double is not an int.
And this would have been an unsafe access.
So Java protected me by crashing the program,
in a more controlled way than CLID, I guess.
And you'll get a compiler error.
if a jerk cannot be cast to a double?
So that's better, but still class cast exception is not so good, right?
I mean, if you're, like, running production code like at your company,
can you get class cast exceptions in your running code?
Like, that's bad news, right?
You're going to get paged in the middle of the night.
Not fun.
Okay, so can we solve this with inheritance?
So, here we have a container-based class.
So, we have an object-container-based class.
So, we have our nodes are defined as abstract classes.
So, the behavior is sort of abstracted out here.
We have an object item here.
We have our next node like before.
If I want to get the last item,
then I have to have this adaptation behavior.
This is actually an adapter pattern just in case you're interested.
But what this is doing is it's saying, well,
I'm going to sort of an adapter pattern.
And I don't remember if the name has to be the same, but this is the same idea, right?
So it's definitely a decorator because it's decorating behavior by doing cast.
Just relating it to my earlier slides.
Yeah, so I'm getting the last and I'm casting two in int.
So why is this good and or bad?
So what I've done is I've shifted the static cast
into my library, right?
My library, this is library code, right?
So my link list code, my nodes, my int nodes,
this is all the library code.
And so I've shifted all this casting behavior into there.
But that doesn't really solve the problem.
I still have to do this in the casting.
So how would I adapt a class for this?
So this is why we have type parameters.
Actually, C-sharp came out with a way to have type parameters,
and then Java in its quest to win in the marketplace added,
this is my interpretation as a Java programmer at that time,
it added type parameters.
if we look at a node class here, we've got these three question marks. By the way,
these are not the three question marks we use in Scala like we're used to using
in Scala, which throws a not implemented error. This is just saying what goes here?
What is the return type here? And it's got the three question marks. And so what
we do is we have type parameters. So we end up with something like this. We have
a generic list using parametric polymorphism. So this is called parametric
polymorphism because polymorphism is many forms, right? Instead of monomorphism like we had before,
now we have many forms. And we're parameterizing what the data elements are, right? So here we're
parameterizing item to be of some abstract type x that we don't care about when we're defining node
and its behavior.
So we have our getlast, does the same thing,
returns the last item element, and that's going to be an x.
And so that's why this x occurs here in the signature.
So now if I want to create a list of integers,
I can allocate my new node like that,
and then set my null pointer to my next pointer to null,
and set my item to some whatever value I want.
And now if I try to do an incompatible read,
the compiler won't let me do it.
So this is different from before.
Before I cast and the compiler let me do it,
I'm sorry, yeah, the compiler let me do it
and at runtime I got an exception, class cast exception.
Here the compiler says, no you can't do this at all.
So this is better because it's erroring out in the compiler
before you ever get to production
when you're being awakened at three o'clock in the morning
with your page.
Now in Java, before they had generics,
I had code in my production code all over the place.
Luckily, the code was pretty localized.
So if you instantiated a list or an array list
or something, there was no...
It was like it was ArrayList.
X equals New ArrayList.
And there were no type parameters
because they weren't valid Java syntax at that time.
So if I wanted to x dot, I think it's put.
0, 3 is my value, I'll do 37.
This would, well, that wouldn't have even compiled because you would have had to do
this, because it had to be a reference type.
And back then, you didn't have auto boxing like we have now, 37.
It was perfectly valid to say x.get 0 and say string y equals.
And what would happen is this would compile just fine.
Sorry, that should line up there.
I didn't put my variable over there.
This would compile just fine, but at runtime, you would get that class cast exception.
But back when I was using the Java collections, you had to be careful and know what you're doing.
If you were using hash maps or array lists.
And usually we use these things, they were encapsulated within like some sort of class definition.
So it was okay because you could catch it much more easily.
We didn't let these data structures escape so much the class that we were encapsulating.
But this was an improvement when they came out with type parameters and generics in Java.
because now I would catch these errors at compile time.
I think you were still allowed, and you still are allowed,
to instantiate any of these parameterized types
without passing the type parameter,
but you'll get a compiler warning probably.
So let me just look ahead a little bit.
Yeah, we're going to talk about the Scala version of this,
and then I'll pause for our break.
So in Java we had this, we had our node and our X is our type parameter.
If we want this, we have the whole behavior and implementation.
In Scala, this is the imperative version of Scala, this is how we do it.
So the syntax is a little different, right?
It's square brackets rather than the angle brackets.
We have, this is actually the constructor.
Over here we didn't have a constructor.
We were actually in Java, we were operating on that.
We would have instantiated the node and then we would have,
in that code where we instantiated,
we would have set our next pointer to null and set our item.
Here, because we have vowels oftentimes,
and this is the standard way to do things in Scala,
we would pass these into the constructor.
And so get last looks the same pretty much.
We can also do this, so that's the imperative way to do it.
This we can do ADTs and recursion.
So we have an enumeration.
So whenever we have an ADT we have an enumeration.
We have nil, which is our empty list.
We have node, which has some head element and then some tail.
Here they're called item and next.
So if I want the last element, then I'm gonna use recursion.
Right? I'm gonna say this match.
And if I get nil, I'm gonna return none, cuz there was nothing.
This is why it's called option by the way.
And then this is pretty standard in scale,
put the word option on there.
If we find, if we have a node with an item,
then we return, this is a,
This is...
Oh, this is right.
We're matching on item and mill,
so we're at the last element.
Okay, here we have some item which we don't care,
so we don't bind it to a name.
And we have a next, which is the tail,
and we're gonna call next.lastOption.
So this could actually be tail recursive, I think.
So this is how we do that in Scala.
All right, we'll stop here for our break.
So I'll let you go until 35, so that's almost 20 hours.
Start up at 35 after.
Oh, yeah, you want to see that?
I have to ...
Your score is all on my computer, so I have to write it into your sheet.
So give me a minute.
No worries.
Most important thing is that I pull the plug on the monitor.
Raven, did you take it in the classroom?
Yes.
You did?
Yeah.
Two weeks ago, I can't remember.
Yeah, I was there.
There you are.
Now what I have to do, I don't have it on here yet because I typed in your answers into
a file, ran a program and typed the scores directly into D2L so I have to find you.
I think I have an idea of which one.
Sure
I'm going to make a lot of bread.
I won't forget to make some bread.
I'm going to put it on the bread.
so
Oh fine.
Oh, okay.
Okay, I screwed up.
Your score is the same, it's just I got offline when I was figuring that out, so that was correct.
Oh.
But so, the other ones.
Okay.
My bad.
I'll make the make up.
I'm going to use the fancy recipe on the shelf.
I'm going to use the fancy recipe recipe for the first time.
I'm going to use the fancy recipe recipe for a lot of these recipes.
Now, I'm going to use the recipe recipe for the recipe recipe for the recipe.
I'm going to use the recipe recipe recipe for a recipe recipe.
So...
It is a really good evening.
It will be the best.
I have a good evening just to begin with.
I'm going to make the most途 of the day.
I just want to make the best.
Thank you.
I'm going to get it done.
For a second, I'm going to use a chip.
I'm going to use a chip.
So, I'll use a chip.
It's what I'm going to use.
You can use a chip.
so
okay
of course
yeah
that's number seven yeah
Let's do this.
I have to keep reading because I'm eliminating.
Okay.
Yeah, I understand that.
Okay, what's your question?
I guess what had it tripped me up.
I think I had got through here and then originally I think I got through here because I'm
agree that I have shot some her, and I guess I didn't even
put up the bar because of the
.
I think I didn't put up the bar because I was
Something.
Yeah, so for this one, being the bar, I guess that was
what kind of tripped me up.
Right.
The reason why it's a var is x is a variable.
You're talking about number three.
So it has to do a lookup, right?
So, if you're running program, you have this variable x.
And so your running program has to figure out, well, what does x mean?
So it has to look it up in a variable store, and it gets seven out.
The difference between var and num.
So, num is like you would just have a number and like, if they don't have that anywhere,
it would be like, literally seven and then seven.
It's not an x and seven.
This had to look up in zi what x means.
sign variables, what x means, and that's just a math.
.
Now that's key .
x is the key and the value is 7, whereas the number would have 7, 4, yeah,
because there's no looking number, it's just literally, it's a literal number.
It's a number.
So yeah, so the answer is a, so r is 7.
And actually, if you collected the process of elimination,
obviously, this is going to be greater than or equal to.
And then, if you think about it, if you read all of it,
figure out that well x is seven and y is two, so seven bigger than or
equal to two, and that's true.
So that's why that's if true.
You're limited to these two choices now.
Now you're just down to is it the number, the bar.
Mm-hm.
Yeah.
I think it over one more time.
I would have .
Good?
Yes.
Any others?
I think the other ones I knew already.
I just wanted to see if they, because I put question marks.
And I was like, yup, they were those ones.
Yeah, cool, alright.
Good morning.
I will know my family.
I'll use the top of the top.
I got a lot of water for a while.
I don't know if you like this!
I'm going to try to keep my own water
and get the top of the top.
I'm not going to be careful.
I'm not going to be able to keep my own water.
I'm not going to be able to keep it.
I'm going to keep it all together.
I'm going to keep it in my favorite place.
I'm going to keep my own water.
I'm going to keep it in my own water.
So let's play this game.
Okay.
All right.
I love you.
so
and
All right, so picking up where we left off, we were talking about generics in Java and
Scala, and I told you a little bit about how generics weren't supported in the earlier
versions of Java, and that gives rise to this consequence.
So Java tries very hard to make sure
that code written in Java before will compile
in newer versions of Java.
So what that means is called backward compatibility.
And what that means as a practical matter
is Java has something called type erasure.
So in Scala, because Scala was, and Scala
doesn't actually provide the same kind of backward compatibility
guarantees.
So in the earlier days of Scala, if you
upgraded from like Scala 2.10 to 2.11, or 2.11 to 2.12,
you actually would get, sometimes your code
wouldn't compile anymore, because they
change the language. But Java doesn't do that. So, with Scala, if I have an array
list like this here, there's going to be this automatically this is, I think this
is... I forget what that's called. This is called the type bound, the syntax here.
So what this means is X actually has a class tag that's associated with it. The
class tag is some identifying information about like X's so if you
actually that code what that syntax means is class array list X that's my
type and then see that part of the right so it says that Scala reflect
last time I'm gonna skip over that for a minute what I have is size and and now
back to that business here to the right of the colon it actually will create
What we used to call in Scala 2, all of Scala 2, it created an implicit parameter.
In Scala 3, it's got using.
And so this will...
And actually, yeah, I think this is the right syntax, but we'll have ct.
I'll just make that up. That's a variable name. Of type class tag.
X.
So that syntax there is called a context bound.
And that means that we're going to have an implicit
available to us in the code. So we'll know what the class is.
So that's what this means. So, um, in Java,
You don't get type parameters, they're not part of any runtime information.
So if I have a class ArrayList here,
if I try to do this and I try to instantiate a new array of Xs,
the compiler will yell at me and say,
we can't do this, that's a generic array creation,
I don't know anything about X.
So I can't allocate memory for that at runtime.
So here, what we have is the solution
for what we had on the previous slide at the bottom
where we tried to do that at line four.
You have to do this.
You have to actually instantiate a new object
and then you have to cast that at runtime
to an x array.
So conform.
So why is the cast not checked at runtime here?
Well, here it doesn't know anything about x.
It's just object.
And that's how Java, when it came along and added generics,
in order to be backward compatible,
it just left out all of the type information at runtime.
There's no place for it on older versions of Java,
your old code will still compile.
So what we typically do is we add this little annotation here to turn off the compiler warning.
So here we got a compiler warning. That was the previous slide. Uncheck cast but this is the
approved solution for this in the current versions of Java and so we have to do this. This shows up
in the data searchers one way because we hand out Java code and then if we have arrays of things,
of objects, we have to if we have arrays of subgeneric type X,
we have to do this.
So it's OK, this is safe, since all references in the array
are null and they can be assigned to any reference type.
So when this is created at runtime,
you get an object array, and the initial value
So it's null for every element.
So it's not possible to check CAS
when writing to an unparameterized list.
So here I have a array list of strings
and now I have an array list
without a generic type parameter.
So this will compile.
And I can then put, call put,
and I can pass this integer here.
And it will actually store a reference to, remember,
it's under the covers.
It's just a reference to an object.
This will box into an integer, capital I, instance.
And then, when I try to call get, this will compile,
because Ss is an array list of strings,
so this will compile.
And at runtime, it will try to cast it to a string,
and it will throw a class cast exception.
So this is to push the problem into the runtime.
But arrays are a little bit different. So arrays are actually checked when assigned.
So Java actually will store types with arrays and that's been the case since the beginning.
So here I have SS is an array of strings
and then I have object OS and I can have OS refer to SS.
And here if I try to call OS and set it, this will try to box it to an integer and try to store it.
But since it's looking for a string to be assigned at that time, you'll actually get, at runtime, an ArrayStoreException.
You're storing the wrong type.
So we talked about Java and Scala and generics.
And now let's think about how C++ handles this.
So in C++, there's a feature called Templates.
And templates are instantiated with concrete types.
And what happens is the compiler checks
that the types fit to all used operations.
So what this code actually happens here.
Here's my main program.
So in my main program, I'm instantiating
my node to be a node of int.
And the compiler actually generates a separate class
for node of int because it encountered
that you wanted a node of int.
If I don't have a node of float or any other type,
it won't actually try to generate that code.
So on the fly, the compiler generates code
based on how you're using it.
This can be a problem.
So here I have my node, which has t abstracted out, and I'm trying to print cout.
So I'm using cout to print, which uses this little operator here in c++.
This will work fine like this for an integer, but if I define my own type, this pair,
this, I believe, will compile just fine.
Oh, no.
It will not compile.
The compiler will complain, because what it's looking for
is it's looking for an implementation
of this operator for my point.
So you see in my printcout, I'm actually
trying to call cout with this operator,
and I need an implementation of that for point.
I get one for free for ints, I get one for probably certain string types in C++.
But when I try to print out my special struct pair here, there is no...
operator, IO stream operator implementation that I can use.
And so the compiler combines.
So, that's how it works in C++.
So what are the benefits of parametric polymorphism?
So we get generality, so we can have one implementation of the code and
that will work for many concrete uses.
So in all the cases we saw with C++ and Java and Scala I didn't have to copy
the code over for every different type, right?
I didn't have to manually do that as a programmer.
The language handles that.
And then I get specificity so type parameters will constrain the possible
So if you think about the difference between these two definitions of f, on the left I
have a type t, and I take a sequence of t and I return an int.
On the right, slightly different, I take a sequence of ints and I return an int.
So for this one there's really only one sensible implementation.
It's the length of the sequence.
So why is that?
Well, we don't know anything about T. You can't do any sort of math on T. You can't
sum up all the T's. But with the one on the right, we have many possible implementations.
So you could have the length of the sequence. You could have the minimum value that occurs
on a sequence. You could have the maximum. You could have the median, the first element,
There are all kinds of implementations.
So you get specificity when you use generics or
parametric polymorphism is the general term for it.
This is that thing I was just doing over here so.
I would say I want to define the ordering of elements.
So this is Scala but
It's sort of the Java way too.
You have subtyping polymorphism.
So what does this mean?
Well, all right, I'm defining a trait, Ord,
over some abstract type T. And I'm going to compare myself.
Because in the implementation of this, I am an Ord.
And I'm going to compare myself with some other Ord.
So if I want to define a max, I could say, oh, OK, well,
I have an x and a y and I'm going to call x dot compare y.
This is like what we get in Java, right?
And if I compare and I get a result back that's bigger than zero,
then x is bigger, so I return x.
And otherwise, I return y.
And so you can add this to class statically.
So when you define a class my int,
you can extend the port of my int.
So this is the classic subtyping polymorphism way to do it.
If I want to do it with parametric polymorphism,
then here what I have is I have x is a t, y is a t.
And I'm using, this is that using thing I have over there.
Using ord, and that's using the order definition that I created.
There's some instance of this.
This is actually called a type class.
some instance of a type class.
And I call that type class, and I say I'm going to compare with X and Y.
And so here, it's different in that I'm not extending my class to have it.
I just have the ordering is decoupled from the type T, so
you can use different orderings.
And then to get an instance of this,
you would just somewhere in your code when you'd had.
There's scoping rules for how the compiler resolves implicit.
So any time you see using or given,
you're dealing with what in Scala 2
would've been called implicit.
And there's scoping rules, so the compiler knows how to find.
And if there's conflicts, it will complain.
like the compiler won't let you proceed.
But this syntax here means I am creating an instance of ord
for int.
And this is what my compare method looks like.
So I'm providing that implementation.
And then at the time this code is compiled,
there has to be a given ord of int.
If you're using ord with, here we have t.
But if we're using ord with ints, I'm sorry,
if we're using max with ints, then
There has to be an ORD event available for the compiler to find.
So that max there has that using ORD there.
In this case I have the context bound, t colon ORD.
So here I have, oh right, what I'm doing is I'm calling reduce left on my sequence, which
is a method that's defined on the sequence and I'm passing max here and what, reduce
left will have an implicit word parameter as well.
There might be, it might be defined with a context bound.
It might be defined with a second parameter list that we had here.
If I want to define a descending order based on ascending order, I can do this using thing
So, here I'm descending using the ascending order.
So, again, there has to be something given, something implicitly given in scope.
And here I'm just constructing a new ord, and I'm just reversing what the other one
does.
And I do that by just reversing the order of the parameters I'm passing.
If I want to find the minimum among the sequence of orderable items, then I can call maximum
maximum using descending.
So you can mix and match these things.
This code, actually, so I think this code here,
this is the code that last quarter I was like,
I've never seen this before,
because usually I work in Scala 3.3 or Scala 3.6.
You have to be in Scala 3.6 to actually get this code to work.
So I learned that, and I don't have it installed on my machine.
But what this is doing is it's extending the ordering
on elements to ordering on containers.
So here, what does this mean?
Well, I have an ordering.
Yeah, the syntax throws me because of this error here,
and I'm not used to thinking about it that way.
But I have a compare method, and so I'm matching on these lists.
If I get nil, nil, well then there's nothing to compare.
If any one of them is nil and the other one has got something,
then this one on the left is less than.
This one on the right here is gonna be greater than,
so that's why it's returning want.
And then if I have this case here
where I have a head followed by some tail for the first list
and a head followed by another tail on the second list,
then I have to compare the head elements.
Don't worry too much about this slide.
So here's our summary on parametric polymorphism.
So we have type parameters, which give us independence
between container classes and the types of contained objects.
We have type safety for reading and writing.
Not all languages are going to retain
the type information at runtime.
So Java compiler knows generics, but JVM does not.
And functional languages will use type parameters
to shift code correctness to the compiler.
So in functional languages, you get the ability
to have your compiler catch more bugs than you would in OO.
C++ templates, so the template itself
has no executable form.
So you have list of T, and then it
generates the executable code for each instantiation.
So if I use a list of ints in a list of strings,
I'll generate executable code that will allow me
to work with lists, events and strings.
And then you might have compile problems get hidden
until you instantiate the template.
All right.
And now we'll talk about subtoping.
This might take us to the end.
We might not get to the end of it.
We'll see where we end up.
Sort of struggled with what order to present things in
because you have homework, so I want
to make sure to cover the things that your homework covers
for this coming week.
And then we can squeeze in other things.
All right, so what should the type relationship
between parameterized types be?
And we're going to talk about restrictions on parametric types.
So we just talked about parametric types,
now we're going to talk about restrictions.
So here we have static and dynamic type.
So our static type of x is A, and our dynamic type is also A.
Our static type of Y is B, and our dynamic type is also B.
And it's okay to take my instance of my B
and assign it to a reference of type A,
to a variable of type A, because B extends A.
That's what this means here.
So that's okay when A is expected.
I can do this with method parameters.
So if I have a consumer that consumes an A
and I want to pass a B, that's okay,
because a B is just extending A,
So that's perfectly legal,
so B is okay when A is expected.
On my method results, if I call a method,
producer in this case, and I get back a B,
I can store it as an A,
because an A is a supertype of B.
And even though it's returning a B,
I can just say, well, I'm gonna refer to that now as an A.
So it's safe to use an instance of B when an A is expected.
B is a subtype of A, so in Scala, we write that like this, B with this little angle, left angle, colon A.
So this means, this is transitive here.
So if Y is a B, as of type B, and B is a subtype of A, then Y is also of type A.
That's an up cast.
So subtyping is not just sub-classing, so when we have parametric polymorphism, some
monkey wrenches get thrown into the mix.
So here's our subtyping relation, this is that Scala syntax up there.
So this subtype relation is a partial order on types.
So it has to be reflexive, so that just means that any type is a subtype of itself.
It has to be transitive, so if duck is a subtype of bird and bird is a subtype of animal, and
duck is a subtype of animal.
Makes sense.
Some programming languages have this notion of a top type, for all X greater than all
other types.
So what does that mean?
Well, there are examples that we can think of.
Java, what does Java have for references?
What's the super-type of everything?
Object.
What about Scala?
Any.
Any, right?
That's the super-type of all types.
So the top type is there.
And then for references, there's like you can say
there's a top type for references.
So any ref.
So this is what we just talked about.
So Java.lany.object is above all reference types.
And in Scala, Scala.any is above all types.
And Scala.any ref is above reference types.
So here, I have a list of any refs.
This is a string, and this is a list of one.
And I can refer to that as a list of any refs, no problem.
Because they're super types.
And then for wise, I have a list of any.
So here, I have a string, and I have an int, or an integer,
or an int, a capital I int in Scala corresponds
to a primitive in Java.
And the reason for this separation between AnyVal
and AnyRef, or I think it's AnyVal,
is because everything in Scala is compiling to JVM.
And so under the covers, when they implement things,
the compiler is using the equivalent of the Java primitive base steps.
So most programming languages don't have a bottom type.
So we just talked about a top type.
Now we have a bottom type.
So in this case, bottom would be a subtype of x for all x.
So it's less than all other types.
So in the Scala type hierarchy, we do have this.
And this is called nothing.
So if we go to the Scala type hierarchy,
this link will take us to this picture,
which I think we saw earlier this quarter,
is what we were just talking about.
We have anyref is above all the object types
that's equivalent to java.lang.object.
These are all the anyval types.
Nothing is below everything.
Also null is below every other reference type.
So this kind of shows you the relationships, right?
This is actually very interesting to me because what is bottom type useful for?
Well, it's important for typing uses of nil.
So nil, we can say, here we have a nil, which we have a variable or a val called nil.
And it's a list of strings.
And we have nil, and that's because nil can also be a list of nothing.
So, nil is actually defined as a list of nothing.
And since a list of nothing is a subtype of a list of anything, that's why this works.
So, the best type possible here, if I have this, I have a list of strings,
because I've declared nil to be a list of strings.
This nil, lowercase, no.
Here, if I do that, well, list of nothing is a subtype of list of strings,
so this will also be able to be a list of strings.
And then I can do the same thing with ints, and I can use my nil here.
If I did this same thing here, I have to have a list of any.
The difference here is that I can make this a list of int.
So, nil is of type list of nothing, and a list of nothing is a subtype of list of x.
So by this transitive property, we have x, which is a list of nothing, is a list of x.
Okay, so now the plot will thicken.
So now we're going to talk about containers.
So here what I have is a container called box.
And my box contains something of type x, whatever x is.
So we have this abstract type.
So my content of my box is an instance of an x.
So I can have concrete boxes.
So here I have a bird box, which contains a bird named feathers.
That's what that is.
Yeah, that's the name.
And then I have a CatBox which contains a cat named Fluffy.
I can create an abstract box if I want.
So I can say, I'm going to have a box that holds animals.
And it has a bird named feathers.
And that's an animal box.
And now I can say animalbox.content is now
going to contain a cat named Fluffy. I can alias boxes. So if I try to do this now,
animalBox equals birdBox, assign this is assignment, it won't compile. And it
doesn't compile because a birdBox is not a subtype of animalBox. You might be
going, well, you just showed me lists. Lists, I could do that. Why can't I do
got with boxes. And that's because box is invariant in its type of parameter
animals. What does that mean? Well, let's dig into that, but let's think about what
could go wrong. So if I allow assignment, so I have a bird box, and then I have an
animal box equals bird box. This doesn't compile, but let's assume it does. Okay, so
So I could read the content.
So my animal box, I can read the content and get an animal out.
So that's OK.
And now I can put a cat into an animal box, so that's OK.
But now the bird box contains a cat because we aliased it.
So if we were to allow that to compile,
This would create a problem.
So we're writing to an alias container,
and that would create type violations.
And Scala, we do not have type violations.
So let's disallow modifying boxes.
So we've seen this syntax before earlier in the quarter,
but now I'm going to present it to you formally.
We have this syntax here with this little plus sign
in front of x.
What does that mean?
Well it means that we're not allowing modifying boxes.
So this is an immutable box.
So now I can create an alias box.
So I have an immutable box that holds a bird named Feathers.
So I'm going to refer to that bird boxes and mutable box of birds.
I can take my bird box and alias it as an animal box, and refer to it as an immutable
box of animal.
And now I can get my animal box content out and refer to it as an animal.
And now I try to set the content of the animal box to a new cat named Fluffy and that won't
work.
I'm not allowed to write.
The compiler will complain, because that's immutable.
So the term for this plus thing, it's saying that immutable box is covariant in x.
The covariance type annotation plus x can only be applied to read-only structures.
So if I were to change this to var and try to compile it, it would complain.
Compiler won't allow that.
So this is what covariance means.
So if I have a class B, this is a little hard to see,
because they all have this C in a circle.
If I have a class B, that's a subtype of class A.
And if I have an immutable box of type B,
well that will be an immutable box of, sorry,
that will be a subtype of immutable box of A.
So again, class B extends class A.
That means, because we're covariant,
immutable box of B will extend immutable box of A.
so it varies with covariance.
So what's the practical relevance of this?
Well, alright, if I print this print line here,
let's print some concrete boxes.
So I have a bird box and a cat box,
and I say print animal name.
That should be fine.
So they should print the names just fine.
Oh, and the reason why is because b.content is going to be some animal.
It's going to call whatever the name is.
Now scala lists, earlier I said I had the box with no variance annotations on the type
parameter, and I said, well, wait, you just showed me lists and that worked.
Well, that's because lists are defined to be covariant.
So if you look at the scholar source for lists,
you'll find that there's a plus X or plus T
or whatever type of variable is.
So if I have a list of birds and a list of cats
and I try to print animal names, I can do all that.
But list has to be covariant to allow print animal names
with concrete arguments of list bird and list cat.
Otherwise, you don't get the relationship that we saw back here on the lower right side of that slot.
You don't get that if it's not covariant.
So that's what that last bullet point means.
It has to be covariant to make that work.
Let's think about arrays.
So Scala Arrays are defined to be invariant.
So if I have an array of birds like this, this is fine.
I can print animal names.
But that's not fine because the compiler will say,
no, you have an array of birds and I need an array of animals.
And because that type that the array is holding
is not declared to be covariant,
then the compiler will compile it.
And this just says, basically, an array of birds
is not an array of animals.
Because of the way you've defined array,
the way Scala defined it.
So Scala and Java arrays are readable and writable.
So Scala arrays are invariant.
So it's like that box that we had,
with the no plus in front of x.
compiler error when writing two alias.
Java arrays are covariant,
so if you try to do this in Java,
you'll get a runtime exception when writing two alias.
So how can we still print arrays generically?
So we can actually do something like this.
We can declare our print animal names parameter animals
to be of this type, it's an array of something
that extends animals.
This is using a wildcard.
So this will work, I think.
This will compile.
Yes, this is right there.
But you can't write to the array
because here it's saying I found a cat
but I'm required to have an animals.teeth,
just kind of a weird error.
But because you have fixed, there's some type that got fixed, and now you're trying to use a different type.
So it won't work.
So what about writing?
So here's my put cat, and I have my box.content.
I'm setting it to contain a cat named Fluffy.
Well, if I try this, I try my, I have my Animal Box.
I pass the cat whiskers and I say put cat,
so I'm gonna take my Animal Box.
Well, a box of Animal is not a box of Car.
So that's no good.
Because the Animal Box could be a bird box.
So what if we disallow readings?
So before we disallowed writing with that covariance annotation.
Now we're going to use something called a contravariant annotation.
So that's what this minus means.
So now if I have a mutable box, this is kind of curious.
I think you could actually declare the bar here, but
I think they're trying to encapsulate it, right?
So this is your, when you construct it, you have to provide an x and
then you're gonna set this private var this variable here.
And now I can put an element here so I can update that.
But I had to do this so that I disallowed your name.
That's why.
This parameter here, this constructor parameter,
is not visible outside.
So here, I have a put cat method that takes a mutable box of cats and I'm adding a fluffy,
cat named fluffy to my box.
Now here I have an animal box that has a new mutable box of cats and I can try to call
put cat here.
And this should work because mutable box is covariant index.
So basically I'm going in there and I'm changing the animal that's being pointed to or referred to.
So contravariance type annotation minus x can only be applied to write-only structures.
So this is the relationship.
So this is similar to what we had before.
So on the left we have the same thing.
We have class A and then we have class B extends A.
What happens with contravariance is immutable box A, notice the arrow here is down here.
I would have written it the other way, but immutable box B is the supertype of the immutable box A.
So because of this triangle here, that's how UML works.
You can draw it from any direction, it doesn't matter.
So contravariance allows this thing called degraded root.
So my beautiful box here, I can create my box and modify it.
So here I'm creating my beautiful box.
It has a bird named Feathers.
And that's an animal box.
And then I get the animal out and I have this any.
So that's called a degraded read because you don't, you lose the type information.
So covariant, I'm sorry, contravariant wildcard.
So here, if I want to add to a list of cats, so I have my cats, listed cats,
and I want more cats, so I add fluffy, so that'll be okay.
If I want to add to a list of animals, though, that won't be okay.
Because list is declared to be covariant.
in the type parameters.
So what does this mean?
So if I have a list of animals, I have a bird and cat
in my list, and then I want to add another cat to animals,
it will complain and say, no, I need a list of cats here
for add fluffy, and you're giving me a list of animals.
So you can't go that direction in the type hierarchy.
So you can accomplish this by using this wildcard.
So this is the same idea.
Notice here, we have this super-type relation here.
That's the opposite of what we had before
with the direction of the angle bracket.
So that's called a contravariant wildcard.
Also, we sometimes call these type bounds.
You might hear the term type bound.
So animals is a list of animals and it has a bird and a cat, and I can add fluffy, but
I'm going to get out a list of any, because it's some type that's a super type of cat,
but we don't know what it is.
So the compiler just says, well, that has to be a list of any.
So in this case, that's what we get, but can we do better than list of any?
So we can use a contravariant type parameter, rather than a wild card.
So here, I have X is a supertype of cat, and I'm bound...
So I'm basically going to force it to be a list of animal.
So here I have a list of animals, inverted and cat, and I have more animals, so I'm going
to add fluffy.
And that works.
And now we're getting into some interesting ways to use types.
So this is called the pinot numbers.
So basically, we're talking about natural numbers.
So we start off at zero with natural numbers.
And every number in the natural numbers is basically a successor to a number.
So we have zero and we have successor, so we have this is an algebraic data type.
Could have probably used an .
Not sure, I've had to check that, not sure.
This is the thing when I sit down and play with Scala for work and
I'm playing with I'm actually implementing something.
I'll try it out and see if it compiles.
and if it doesn't pile down, I'm like, oh, I must be .
But we have 0, we have a successor to some natural number.
So I have 1 as a successor of 0, and then 2 as a successor of 1, and so on.
These are type aliases, so
you have 0 as defined as a sub-type of nat, but
Here now I'm defining one as a successor of this other type.
So I believe this code is probably only gonna compile
on Scala 3.7 or beyond.
So here I have a trait, and the trait is named
left angle bracket.
And then I have two types A and B
which are subtypes of the natural numbers.
And now I have an object, so this is a companion object
for that thing.
Here's a base case, so given, this is an implicit thing.
And then this is the inductive case.
This syntax, this is the one where I kinda got stuck
before and I was like, this is part of what I've never
seen before until last quarter, and I've not used
Scala 3D, so I wouldn't worry about this.
This is just an example of my .
So you can play around with it if you wanna upgrade
because I have a smaller scale of like 3.8 or 3.7 or something.
So the compiler here is going to infer the type of P given types in object, ankle bracket left.
So here's our summary. This is the important step.
Subtype polymorphism. So we talked about that earlier.
B is a subtype of A. That's what we're used to when we're dealing with objects
oriented types.
And we have classes extending classes or implementing
interfaces or abstract classes.
That's subtype polymorphism.
Parametric polymorphism is when we parameterize a class
with a type parameter.
Then we have covariant, contrarian, and invariant.
So this just kind of gives you those three concepts
and then talks about the relationships.
So for covariant we can read, but we can't write,
The container class is coded, so we can read and we can't write.
The relationship is that the container of the subclass is a subclass of.
That's a lot of subclassing.
So if B is a subtype of A,
then the container of B is a subtype of the container of A.
The box would be immutable, the collection would be a list.
The annotation to define that type is to use this plus symbol.
And the functions that we have would be we're producing x.
So we're reading x.
We're consuming.
Not consuming.
Sorry, that's consuming.
This is producing x.
We have nothing but we get an x out of .
For contravariant, we can write, in this case, if a, I'm sorry,
if b is a subtype of a, that means the container of a is
a subtype of a container of b.
So this is the opposite of that.
The box is mutable.
There is no real collection here because we can't read.
So it doesn't really make sense.
The way you define this is you define your type parameter
with the minus.
And this is the definition of the container class team,
by the way, just to make that clear.
Functions, so this is the consumer.
So you're writing, but you're not reading.
Invariant, you can read and you can write.
So subtype, I'm sorry, container of A. So if A, sorry,
if B is a subtype of A, there's really no relationship
between the containers.
We saw that with the code that did the group.
Our box is going to be that box of x that we had in the initial set of slides back in
the beginning of this deck.
Our collection is going to be an array, not a list.
Our annotation here.
We have no annotation, so here we have plus for covariant and minus for
contrivarian.
Here we're invariant, so there's nothing.
And then our functions, well we can take an x and produce an x.
We can read and we can write.
So Java arrays are covariant.
So here's an example.
We have an array of Bs, and then we're going to say,
we're going to have AS as a reference to an array of A's,
and we're going to alias, and that's OK because it's covariant.
And then if we try to store a new A in here,
We'll get an array store exception because at runtime,
it knows it's supposed to have b's.
And then if we want to access the zero of the element
and call g, we can try that.
But here, this code would complain at line,
I think it should be four.
So every assignment to an object array is dynamically checked.
So why?
Well, if we wanted to in Java if we want to sort there's a lot of
ways that sort methods are typically defined like arrays.sort.
There's an object array.
and if I have an array of strings and I want to call sort on the strings I need covariance to
make that work. Java generics this is if you've ever seen this in Java this is like some of what
we were talking about so this means X is extending comparable of some type that is a superclass of X
In Scala, that's what it looks like.
I have X is some type of comparable of some type that's a super type of X.
So if I wanna use this, I can say class A implements comparable of A.
Class B extends A.
I can have an array of B's and I can sort.
Here's another example.
This might be useful.
This is the producing and consuming that I was talking about before.
Source is going to produce something.
I can get an x out of my source.
I can put an x into my sink and that will have some sort of side effect.
It would do something, but it will return unit like when that method is called.
And then if I have a reference to an X, then that's going to be invariant.
It's read-write, but I can't change it.
But here, class ref extends source X with sync X.
So if you are trying to extend something that has a mismatch between the variance annotations,
then you have to be invariant.
So I love this slide because when I looked at it last night, I'm like,
what's d, r, and s?
once we have to actually move ahead to get to DR.
So we create our type hierarchy.
We have our animal, bird, cat, duck.
Notice duck is extending bird, but bird and cat
are extending animal.
I can create my references.
So I have a reference to a bird.
I have a source of animals, which I can take my refer of bird
and treat it as a source.
And then sync, I can actually push duck,
so it looks like, into the reference.
So one of the static and dynamic types.
So D is going to be a duck.
I'm going to call sync.put.
And then I'm going to call ref.get and source.get.
And I guess I would have to type this in.
So one of the static and dynamic types of DR and S.
So here's D. So D is statically a duck, and dynamically a duck.
R is what we call ref.px.
So here we have a ref of birds.
So that's invariant, so R should be a bird, static and dynamic.
and then source.get.
If I call source.get, I should get static and animal.
Oh, you know what I don't remember
is that I put a bird or did I put a duck?
I look at ref, I have a bird, but no duck.
Never instantiated a duck.
So when I call ref.get, I get bird out.
When I call source.get, statically I get an animal out.
But if my ref has a bird, my dynamic type will be a bird.
Here's another example.
So functions, this covariance and contravariance actually makes a little bit more sense if you think about it in terms of functions.
So notice that if you ever look at the scala source for the function trait, you'll see that the input to your function,
the parameter that goes into your function, the x thing, is contravariant.
And the output is codemarian.
So you can play around with this code.
This just means that you can think about functions in terms of the input and output parameters
with their subtypes and supertypes through that.
And then, here's your variance annotation.
So we have producer, consumer.
So there's covariant, contravariant.
will have both and operators are typically invariant.
Think about that operator.
What's the classic example?
It's like plus, right?
So you've got two integers.
You've got to have the same type.
You've got to have integers to add.
You can't add something that's an integer with some other thing.
It doesn't make sense.
So if I try to find a producer like this instead of like that,
the compiler will yell at me and say, no, type Y
occurs in covariant position.
So that would allow you to create type errors at runtime
if it would allow that to compile.
The same with consumer the other way.
So you can't write something that's new.
So that's covariance and covariance, right?
So that stuff can be pretty heavy.
Because when I first thought about it,
When I was learning Scala, I was like, oh, wow.
Yeah, this is like, why is a container of B,
if B extends A, why is it not a container of A necessarily?
Why is it not a subtype of?
And that's, it requires you to think about that.
It took me a little while to get that concept,
and then it's not something we talk about very often anymore.
like because usually I'm not defining like library code.
So all right, so we've got about a half hour left.
So what I'd like to do is go back through and review stuff.
So this will hopefully be a little later.
I thought we would start with stuff from last week.
Maybe we could alternate between weeks.
What I would recommend though is like next week, come to class.
If you have specific ones on the study guide, you want to go over.
So in each question, just like before, it tells you which slides, which set of slides.
And every quarter I go through, because it's randomly generated, and I go through and I
make a list of which weeks cover which stuff, right?
So then I can kind of go back through.
So I'll start with last week's material, and then I'll kind of alternate between like week
seven, week six.
So let me bring this up.
No, that's the midterm study guide.
That's the wrong way.
I'm still on midterm.
Midterm on my brain.
Let's close that.
The first one we'll do is
is number three.
I'm gonna skip around these,
but I wanna do the ones that are
specific to the topic.
So this talks about scope and lifetime,
which we did last week.
So we have these Scala definitions.
So we have our object o, and we have x is a val, it looks like it's type int.
We have function, we have a val g which is a function here,
that function takes an int, our f takes an int, our g also takes an int.
And g is gonna do, what is g doing?
If x is zero, it just returns itself.
Otherwise, it calls, oh, it's going to recursively call g, okay?
And then add x to it, okay?
And then when you call f, you'll call g first, okay?
And then there's this other g out here, right?
I've never seen this question before, so let's see how we do.
Each line of code has a comment,
giving unique numbers to each occurrence of an identifier.
Which one of the following statements is false?
Okay, so let's go through.
So G3 is statically bound to G4.
So G3 here is statically bound to G4.
Is that true or false?
G3 is here.
This is the occurrence of G3 and G4 is defined here.
I think G3 is not statically bound to G4.
That's what I think.
Let's look at the other answers and see what we think.
So O2 is statically bound to O1.
So where's O2?
O2 is here.
It's statically bound to O1.
That looks right to me.
I don't see any other occurrence of O.
So that's a true, so that's not the answer.
X4 and X5 are statically bound to X3.
So let's see, x4 and x5.
So that's x4 and that's x5 are statically bound to x3.
That's x3.
That's here.
And we have x3 here.
And we're inside, because we're indented, we're inside that function g there.
That's defined at line 4.
So yeah, that looks like it's true.
F2 is statically bound to f1.
So let's see.
F2 is statically bound to F1.
That looks correct because this is going to call the F that's defined in O, right?
So that looks true.
And then X8 is statically bound to X2.
X8, so we're calling G here, is statically bound to X2.
So that x there refers to that x that's defined in f.
So I think the answer to this question is a, which is the false statement.
So since this is what number, what I say, number 3?
Yeah, it's a.
Good.
I'll mark down that particular one.
So hopefully it's a lot to read, but do you
understand what the code says?
So the solution strategy provided says,
so you determine the meaning of a variable.
You want to determine the meaning.
You look for a declaration in the current block.
And if there is none, you're searching the enclosing code
block, and so on.
So this goes back to the static scoping.
Variations.
You can change some of the names and see what kind of behavior you get on,
go through all that.
So that was from last week's material.
Just jump back to week six, that was the week of midterm.
Let's look at question one.
Oh, a whole bunch of introductory text.
So we have three variables.
I'm gonna read it for a second.
They're not parameters of the function and they're not locally defined in the function
body.
But they have to be bound to variables of the functions environment.
So this is what we talked about, closures.
So a closure is basically a data structure that the compiler uses that
takes a function, when you go to execute that function,
there's some environment that you get that has the variables,
that gives meaning to the variables.
So design choices, one of which, one of the design choices is to
to determine whether the closure contains copies of the state when the function is defined,
or whether it should contain references to memory shared between the closure and the outside environment.
So in Scala, the nature of the variable in the environment, mutable versus immutable, determines the choice.
Mutable variables are shared, and immutable variables are copied, so that's a difference in our closures.
For mutable variables, the closure data structure needs to provide slots for references.
for immutable variables, it needs to provide slots for values.
All right, so here's our code.
We have f and we have x and y.
And when we execute f, we pass x and y.
And we get back, what's this?
What does that mean?
It's a fat arrow, right?
So what does that tell you?
We talked about this in the beginning.
What's a fat arrow on a type?
It's a function taking no arguments so it returns an integer.
Exactly.
So it's a function that takes nothing and returns an integer.
Not nothing, literally, like the type nothing, but takes no arguments.
This is where English gets like say something in overloaded meaning.
All right.
So inside of my f, what's going on?
I've got a var C, that's gonna be what type?
Integer.
It's an integer, why Matt?
Because y is an integer.
Right, and Scala's gonna do type inference there, right.
And then we have this function that's being declared here,
it's a unit.
This is get unit.
And we get back.
Well, we access c, we add x to it, so we get our x from there, and then we return that.
So that's our integer.
So we get to the question.
A way of representing the closure built for the anonymous function is using a class.
So which of the following best describes the fields that are required in that class?
So what fields do we need?
Remember that parameters in Scala are immutable, and we call the difference between R and Val.
So what do we need in order to, when we return this function,
we need to know what c is, and we need to know when this function executes,
we need to know what c is and we need to know what x is, right?
So which one is it?
Well, we need a c and we need an x, right?
So, this one has a c and an x, this one has a c and a y, so we can exclude that.
This one has a c and an x, this one has a c and an x, this one has a c and an x and
a y, but we don't need the y.
So we can exclude that.
So we can exclude B and E, so we're down to three choices.
Will you put your hand on matter each other?
I was scratching my head.
I think it's C.
You think it's C?
Why do you think it's C?
Because X is a VAL and C is a VAR, and VARs are shared,
whereas VALs are not, between closures.
And that is exactly right,
I just double-checking to make sure I'm not speaking that term.
That's my interpretation too.
So what Matt is saying is that for x, x, when we get x passed into f,
it's a vowel, right?
We can't override, we couldn't say x equals 5 in the middle of this code if we wanted
to, because the compiler wouldn't let us.
So that's not mutable.
It's immutable.
So final int x is good for a parameter in the closure.
For the...
Remember the closure is going to create like a class, right?
This is declaring that x is in you.
And then c, notice c is a var.
And as Matt pointed out, and as we saw on an earlier slide, that c is going to be shared.
Or we saw that up there I think in the text.
That C is going to be shared across different functions returned by F.
So if I call F multiple times, that C, I'm sorry,
if I call this function multiple times,
that C is going to have to be updated.
So it's going to have to be interref.
If I call this again, if I call F again,
And you can look at it, if it were this one here, well,
you'd never be able to update c because it's finally right.
And if you look at we excluded that because of the y.
So that was the correct answer.
For this one well, we have no need to update x,
So this wouldn't be an hidden graph.
And then the last one we have.
So the solution strategy is to determine
the free variables of the anonymous function.
Closure should have one field per free variable.
Determine the variables in the environment
that you need to bind these free variables
and note their nature.
So this is val versus var.
Val becomes copy.
And then var becomes references.
So if you changed var c to val c and modified the function,
you'd have to modify it because you wouldn't be able to update c.
Or wait, did I say that wrong?
Change var c to val c and you wouldn't be able to update c.
I wouldn't see.
It's just the mouse control.
Yeah, you wouldn't be able to update C, right?
You could try out thinking through different ones.
Change the inner function to update C to C plus y.
So if you start introducing y, then basically everywhere
we had x with that nref would become a y.
That's week six.
Let's do something from the front.
Because that was before the exam but not on the exam.
Sorry, we're gonna do question two.
Yes, this came up at one point in the disk board.
So continuation passing, this was on your own one.
It's an implementation style that replaces return values
with something called a continuation function
that's invoked with a result.
So for example, a function in the usual return value style.
So there we have f, takes an x that's an int,
it returns a string, and in continuation passing style,
you would have f takes an x, that's an int, and then k takes a string and
returns a unit, and then the whole function will return .
All right, so here we have this tail recursive implementation of the factorial
function, and it uses continuation passing.
So is anybody see?
I'm looking for, yeah.
I'm tripping up because the usual examples we had,
had something that had a variable memory,
like bar and you can change it.
So, here, so this uses continuation passing because this is the continuation of this k
thing, this function.
So which of the following continuation functions fits the expected signature of k and prints
the result to the console array?
Alright, so if we look at here, the function has to take an int and return a unit.
So this function takes not an int, but a list of ints.
It does print lines.
So that's gonna, the last expression is type unit,
because the type of print line expression is unit.
So that part is right, but this part isn't right
on the left side.
So it's not that.
Okay.
The next one,
looks like the types match up, right?
So here we have X, what's X?
Oh, well, we don't know.
But it could work.
If this were an int, and if the calling code where you're passing this expression, or you're
using this expression, x refers to an int, then that would work.
This type is correct, but the types aren't everything.
We also need to print the result to the console.
So this won't actually print anything, so it can't be that.
Okay, this one, fact.
Well fact, we're basically trying to pass fact as K here,
and that would mean that fact would have to take a single integer.
And it takes more than, in fact, it takes more than an integer.
It takes an integer and a function.
So that won't work.
This one here, this is looking promising.
So I have x.
We know for sure x is an integer because we're declaring it as such here.
Printing x and remember that this is going to be, this expression is going to be of type unit.
So the last expression here is the return type essentially.
And that's conforming and doing the behavior that we're expecting.
This one here won't print, right?
It'll take an in, but it won't print.
It'll do this, it'll actually return an integer too.
So the correct answer looks like it's going to be D.
I'm sure enough of this.
So this is passing and continuation.
So here, we didn't even talk about this, but
what this is doing is if I'm passing this thing as the second parameter to my call
to fact, my recursive call to fact, then this has to conform to that signature.
So that means I'm creating a variable, or a value called result of N minus 1.
And then I'm calling k with n and multiplying n times the whatever this value is.
So that's the communication that's present.
So to do this one, match the argument type of fun, we just did that.
So we match the argument type of the function to the left of the arrow of
the continuation function of the answer.
And check the right-hand side of the arrow that is performing the requested
functionality, which was that it was printing, right?
I think somebody asked me about this earlier tonight, and this is bad, right?
Is that what we talked about earlier?
Yeah, so this is.
variation is bad.
I don't think this would work, because this is not a function.
Oh, actually, this doesn't occur in the text of the question above, so you can't change
that.
So there's a bug in the study guide for this variation, so don't worry about it.
I already made a note to fix that.
Let's go back to week seven.
So the next one we'll do is 21.
Now, that might be our last one, because we have 10 minutes left.
We'll see where we get.
So 21.
That's what we're doing.
Ah, C, our friend.
So C, as in many systems languages, doesn't protect us against unsafe memory access.
So an unsafe memory access occurs whenever memory is read or written inconsistent with
the data that is stored there, or when the lifetime of memory location is .
So here's some code.
Here's our main program.
We have int x, gets the value 5.
We have a double y that's getting a copy of x and the compiler will coerce that x which
was an int into a double.
And now I'm going to have p be a pointer to a double and I'm going to get the address
of x.
And then I'm going to have z, I'm going to dereference p as a double and
store it in z.
So, which line makes an unsafe memory access?
What do we think?
This is okay, right?
I just told you the second one's okay.
Because the compiler will say, oh okay, I'm going to take the int and copy it.
Okay, what happens here?
I go to my x, which is an int, and I get the address of x.
And that's going to refer to some location in memory.
I'm going to store it in p as a pointer to a double.
Now, typically, ints and doubles in C are gonna have different numbers of bytes, right?
So right here, I'm going to,
I think the unsafe memory access actually happens here when I try to de-reference it,
because I'm trying to read it.
I'm not really writing, I'm just copying.
Here I'm copying an address into something.
So I think the answer here is gonna be line five.
So the answer is line five.
So, makes sense?
So that could trip you up, because my eye went here and said, oh, dangerous.
I'm taking an int, an address of an int, and I'm storing it as a pointer to a double.
But I'm not actually doing anything unsafe yet.
It's only here.
Alright, so that was that one.
Let's go do another six.
Five minutes left.
I'll probably do it.
Oh, you know what I didn't do?
I didn't talk about the variations.
Anyway.
So solution strategy, yes.
When dereference the pointer.
So that was the answer to dereference.
You could change the code around.
So if we change this double star p equals ampersand x,
change that to star p was ampersand.
Oh, sorry, in star p.
OK.
That would be OK.
And then I think there would be no unsafe memory access
in this case here.
Everybody see why.
I get the address of x, and I store it into a pointer to an int.
So I'm changing this double to int.
And now I'm dereferencing it and then
copying it into some other variable z.
So I think that would be OK.
what if I allocated x dynamically in line two
and free it before line five?
So I allocated x dynamically in line two.
That would mean that I would be calling malloc size event,
right, and then at line five,
if I had already freed x,
So if I have copied value, I think we would need more than that.
If I allocated it, I would have an unsafe memory access link somewhere in here.
Wouldn't X have to itself be a pointer if you're-
Say again?
Wouldn't X have to be a pointer itself-
X would have to be a pointer, but then that would make this bad, right?
Yeah.
to do something else, it's a little bit,
that's why I'm saying it's, oh.
Yeah, no, it doesn't say anything more, right?
It just says allocate x dynamically
so you've got a problem already, right?
You could actually, this code would compile,
then somewhere you would have an unsafe memory access.
But if you freed before here,
see it depends on what you change this to
if you change it, right?
doesn't really say, right? So if I copied...
yeah, it's a little bit vague, right? You have to think through all the possible
options. I don't think we're going to get to that last question. How about replacing
lines four and five with that? So line four and five double Z equals... so here I
Okay, address of x, I cast it to a pointer to a double, and
then dereference it.
I don't think that's safe either.
I think that would give you the same result as the original.
I think so, yeah.
Well, all it's doing is-
It's pretty in a line.
It's doing the same thing, but doing it in one line, right?
See that?
Because this is address of x is going into a double, a pointer to a double.
That's what's happening here.
And then it's dereferencing that.
Right?
So, yeah.
Yeah, the second one, let's see.
If you allocated x dynamically in line two, you'd have to use a malloc.
So x would have to be a pointer to an int.
And then if you, I'm going to think this through.
If you would have to either, I mean, this will compile,
and it will take that address of whatever that is
and store it as a double in Y.
I guess you're not doing an unsafe memory access there.
You're just saving it like you're storing it.
So that line would be OK.
then the address of x would be the address of the pointer, right?
And then you're storing that as a pointer to a double, I think.
Yeah, I'd have to.
I almost want to put that code, put it in an editor and compile it and see what it does.
Maybe run Valgrind on it, which I don't have installed on my machine,
because we talk about that once.
And now, I'm trying to de-reference that.
I think here, we would still have an unsafe memory access there.
If you freed it before line 5, I don't know that, I, if you freed it before line 5,
I guess it, okay, the reason I'm stumbling over all this is, I almost feel like,
you almost have to change all the lines of code to be compatible until line 5, right?
Because then, you would potentially be trying to de-reference P,
which would be the address of, which would, oh yeah.
So maybe you would have double, oh,
I'm tripping over the whole thing.
I'm feeling like I wanna play around with this question
and decide what I'm gonna do with it.
So I don't have an answer for you.
Think about it, maybe I'll think about it over the week
and decide what I wanna say, so stay tuned to the Discord.
Well, all right, so it's nine o'clock,
so you got your stuff.
Oh, I'm sorry about homework.
Whatever the last homework grades.
The grader told me today they were done,
but I had a chance to review.
So I will do that.
I always review the grader's work
before I publish the grades, so I want to do that.
See you in office hours tomorrow if you need to come to office
hours for any reason.
Please send me a message if you're doing that so I know.
And have a good week.
Thanks.
I'm gonna use this one.
I'll use this one.
It's a bit more easy.
I'm gonna use this one.
I'll use this one.
I love this and this is a very funny one.
I like it.
It's fun.
We'll show you how it's been.
Have a good week, Dillon.
You too.
See you next week.
Have fun on perfect.
It won't take more than five minutes.
I'll do the same thing whenever I go on vacation.
I don't want to like...
But that's why like the end of the...
So the end of the school year, my office is bad at home.
Like I'm actually going to take a few days off of work and deep clean my office.
It's not like dirty, like dirt.
It's just clutter.
Yeah, exactly.
And I have like...
There's like a closet in my office that needs to be like...
I just need to completely go through and throw things out.
And this is the kind of thing that you just need time.
Yeah.
Large amounts of time.
What's worked for me in the past is take like a Thursday, Friday and a Monday off and order
food all weekend.
Just order my food and don't try to do anything other than get up, work, and then maybe have
a drink at the end of the day and relax.
That's how my closet is at home.
I have a bunch of old PCs and components and I didn't want to throw away.
Recycling them.
Recycling them, but clearing on hard drives.
Yeah.
Sometimes I want to use an old computer for something.
I have old monitors too, I really want to throw away an old 16x10 monitor because we can't
really buy those anymore.
Is it like an old, like with a tube in it?
Like the CRT?
I do have one.
You ever seen one?
Yes, yes.
I first came here in LePol because I'm a transfer student.
And I took one of the classes that was all freshmen.
And they didn't know how old that was.
And then I told them.
And then they're like, oh my God, you were around when two televisions were around.
Because they're all...
They're probably all 19, 20.
And I was like, yeah, I'm 28.
And they're like, what the hell?
I was the first thing I said was two television.
Yep, yeah two television.
What were they?
I mean I used to hear the buzzing that he used to say but now that I'm older I definitely
could not hear it.
Yeah, TVs were all like that.
Yeah.
When I was a kid.
It wasn't until, I want to say the 2000, the first decade of the 2000s I think.
I think.
Yeah, the first time I got a flat screen TV was 2009.
Yeah, somewhere around then is when I had one.
Yeah.
So.
And then they weren't all flat screened in my house until probably 2013.
Probably when I got rid of my last...
Wow.
Well...
Have a good night.
You too.
I will let you know if you have any questions.
Alright.
Good luck.
Thank you.
This is when I would say stuff started to get harder last time.
When it came to the classes.
Around here?
Yeah.
The subclass of this extends this.
And when it comes to other languages.
It makes your brain explode.
But I'm feeling more confident now.
We'll see when I start working on the homework.
Yeah.
We'll let me know if you have any questions.
No, we'll do.
All right.
I'll see you next week.
You too.
All right.
I remember I was actually a kid who was looking for a new one.
I was looking for a lot of people who wanted to be in this room.
And I thought there was a lot of people who wanted to be here,
but I was like, oh man, I'm going to work on that.
I'm going to work on a little bit.
I could do that.
So let's go.
Thank you.
OK, so let's go.
.
Thank you.
Okay.
Amen.
do
I'm going to interrupt.
Amen.